HOW TO GET A PhD
A handbook for students and their supervisors

FOURTH

EDITION

Worldwide

Bestseller

Reviews of the third edition:

This is an excellent book. Its style is racy and clear…an impressive
array of information, useful advice and comment gleaned from the
authors’ systematic study and experience over many years…should
be required reading not only for those contemplating doctoral study
but also for supervisors, new and experienced.
Higher Education
Since the first edition of this innovative book appeared in 1987 it has
become a worldwide bestseller. Through it many thousands of students
in all faculties and disciplines have been helped to gain their PhDs.

How to get a PhD

This remains the best general…introduction to working on the PhD.
It is well worth consulting by anyone considering the PhD as a route
to take, either part-time combined with employment, or full time as
a route into academia.
Social Research Association

How to get a

PhD
A handbook for students and their supervisors

Practical and clear, this book examines everything students need to
know about getting a PhD through research in any subject. It also helps
supervisors and examiners to better understand their role in the process.

• Completely updated throughout
• New section on increasingly popular professional doctorates such as
EdD, DBA and D.Eng
• New material for overseas, part-time and mature students, and their
supervisors
• New diagnostic questionnaire for students to self-monitor progress
• Takes in the impact of the new Code of Practice of the Quality
Assurance Agency
Includes stories of other PhD students, problems they encountered and
how they dealt with them!

How to get a PhD is the essential handbook for doctoral students!

Phillips and Pugh

New to this edition:

Dr Estelle M. Phillips is an independent educational consultant.
She specializes in giving advice on appropriate provision for research
students, and in conducting training for doctoral students and
supervisors.
Professor Derek S. Pugh is Emeritus Professor of International
Management of the Open University Business School. He has
considerable experience in the design of doctoral programmes and
the successful supervision of PhD students.
Cover illustration: Chris Madden
Cover design: Kate Prentice
ISBN 0-335-21685-4

9 780335 216857

Estelle M. Phillips and Derek S. Pugh

I

I

HOW TO GET A PhD
Fourth edition
I

I

I

I

HOW TO GET A PhD
A handbook for students
and their supervisors
I

I

FOURTH EDITION
revised and updated
ESTELLE M. PHILLIPS
and
DEREK S. PUGH

Open University Press

Open University Press
McGraw-Hill Education
McGraw-Hill House
Shoppenhangers Road
Maidenhead
Berkshire
England
SL6 2QL
email: enquiries@openup.co.uk
world wide web: <www.openup.co.uk>
and Two Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121-2289, USA

First published 1987
Reprinted 1988 (twice), 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993
Second edition first published 1994
Reprinted 1994, 1995, 1996, 1998, 1999
Third edition first published 2000
Reprinted 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2005
First published in this fourth edition 2005
Copyright © Estelle M. Phillips and Derek S. Pugh 2005
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purpose of criticism and
review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form, or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher or a licence from the
Copyright Licensing Agency Limited. Details of such licences (for reprographic reproduction)
may be obtained from the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd of 90 Tottenham Court Road,
London, W1T 4LP.
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library
ISBN–10: 0 335 21684 6 (pb) 0 335 21685 4 (hb)
ISBN–13: 978 0 335 21684 6 (pb) 978 0 335 21685 7 (hb)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
CIP data applied for
Typeset by RefineCatch Limited, Bungay, Suffolk
Printed in the UK by Bell & Bain Ltd, Glasgow

Dedicated to
SHELDON, JEROME AND BRADLEY REBACK
and
THE PUGHS and THE ARIELS

I

I

CONTENTS
I

Preface to the fourth edition

I

xiii

1 On becoming a research student
The nature of doctoral education
The psychology of being a research student
The aims of this book
Action summary

1
2
4
5
5

2 Getting into the system
Choosing the institution and field of study
The scientific research programme
Eligibility
Grants and research support
Distance supervision?
Choosing your work context
Selecting your supervisor
Starting out as a research student
Myths and realities of the system
The ‘ivory tower’
Personal relationships
Teamworking
Action summary

7
7
9
10
11
12
13
14
16
17
17
17
18
19

3 The nature of the PhD qualification
The meaning of a doctorate
Becoming a fully professional researcher

20
20
22

viii

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

Differences between the MPhil and the PhD
Aims of students
Aims of supervisors
Aims of examiners
Aims of universities and research councils
Mismatches and problems
Action summary
4 How not to get a PhD
Not wanting a PhD
Not understanding the nature of a PhD by overestimating
what is required
Not understanding the nature of a PhD by underestimating
what is required
Not having a supervisor who knows what a PhD requires
Losing contact with your supervisor
Not having a thesis
Taking a new job before finishing
Action summary

24
25
26
28
29
30
31
33
33
35
37
39
40
41
43
44

5 How to do research
Characteristics of research
Intelligence-gathering – the ‘what’ questions
Research – the ‘why’ questions
Characteristics of good research
Research is based on an open system of thought
Researchers examine data critically
Researchers generalize and specify the limits on their
generalizations
Hypothetico–deductive method
Basic types of research
Exploratory research
Testing-out research
Problem-solving research
Which type of research for the PhD?
The craft of doing research
Action summary

46
46
47
48
48
48
49

6 The form of a PhD thesis
Understanding the PhD form
Background theory
Focal theory
Data theory
Contribution

56
56
57
58
58
59

49
50
51
51
52
52
52
54
55

CONTENTS

I

ix

Detailed structure and choice of chapter headings
The concept of originality
Writing the thesis
Writing as a process of rewriting
Different types of writers
Getting down to it
The thesis itself
Alternative thesis styles
To publish or not to publish prior to submission?
Action summary

60
61
63
63
64
65
66
67
68
70

7 The PhD process
Psychological aspects
Enthusiasm
Isolation
Increasing interest in work
Transfer of dependence from the supervisor to the work
Boredom
Frustration
A job to be finished
Euphoria
Others ‘getting in first’
Practical aspects
Time management
The duration of the process
The stages of the process
Redefining long-term and short-term goals
The importance of deadlines
Self-help and peer support groups
Internet groups
Teaching while studying for a PhD
Casual teaching
Teaching assistantships
Action summary

71
71
71
72
73
74
76
76
77
78
79
80
80
82
82
86
87
89
90
91
91
92
93

8 How to manage your supervisors
The supervisory team
The supervisory team’s limitations
What supervisors expect of their doctoral students
Supervisors expect their students to be independent
Supervisors expect their students to produce written work that is
not just a first draft
Supervisors expect to have regular meetings with their research
students

94
94
95
97
97
98
99

x

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

Supervisors expect their research students to be honest when
reporting on their progress
Supervisors expect their students to follow the advice that they
give, especially when it has been given at the request of the
postgraduate
Supervisors expect their students to be excited about their work,
able to surprise them and fun to be with!
The need to educate your supervisors
How to reduce the communication barrier
Improving tutorials
Changing supervisors
Inappropriate personal relationships in supervision
Action summary

101
103
105
105
108
110
111

9 How to survive in a predominantly British, white, male,
full-time, heterosexual academic environment
Part-time students
Overseas students
Settling in to Britain
Expressing yourself in English
The culture of British doctoral education
Ethnic minorities
Racial harassment
Women students
Difficulties concerning legitimacy of topics and methodology
Problems of communication, debate and feedback
Scarcity of academic role models
Sexual harassment and exploitation
Gay, lesbian, bisexual and trans-gender students
Heterosexist harassment
Mature students
Students with disabilities
Disability legislation
Harassment of people with a disability
Action summary

112
112
114
115
116
117
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
127
128
129
130
130
131
131

10 The examination system
Upgrading to doctoral student status
Giving notice of submission
The appointment of examiners
Submitting the thesis
The oral examination – the ‘viva’
Preparing for the viva
The results of the examination

135
135
136
136
136
137
138
140

100

101

CONTENTS
The appeals procedures
Litigation
Action summary
11 How to supervise and examine
What students expect of their supervisors
Students expect to be supervised
Students expect supervisors to read their work well in advance
Students expect their supervisors to be available when needed
Students expect their supervisors to be friendly, open and
supportive
Students expect their supervisors to be constructively critical
Students expect their supervisors to have a good knowledge of the
research area
Students expect their supervisors to structure the tutorial so that
it is relatively easy to exchange ideas
Students expect their supervisors to have sufficient interest in
their research to put more information in the students’ path
Students expect supervisors to be sufficiently involved in their
success to help them get a good job at the end of it all!
Establishing a role model
Teaching the craft of research
Giving effective feedback
Introducing a structured ‘weaning’ programme
Maintaining a helpful ‘psychological contract’
Encouraging students’ academic role development
Supervising non-traditional students
Part-time students
Problems of access
Organizing work
Overseas students
Ethnic minorities
Women students
Gay, lesbian, bisexual and trans-gender students
Mature students
Disabled students
Supervising your research assistant
Outcomes of good supervision
Training for supervision
How to examine
The oral examination
Action summary

I

xi
142
144
144
145
145
145
147
148
149
150
151
151
153
153
154
154
155
160
162
164
165
165
165
166
166
169
170
171
172
173
173
174
175
175
178
179

xii

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

12 Institutional responsibilities
University responsibilities
A university-wide graduate school for doctoral students
Participation in a regional hub
Support for students
Facilities for departments to support doctoral research activity
A university-wide structured induction procedure
A handbook for university research degree students
English language support where necessary
Support for non-traditional students
Resources for supervisors
The training of supervisors
Teaching credit for doctoral supervision
Faculty/departmental doctoral research tutor
Providing appropriate regulations
Selection of doctoral students
Monitoring of students’ progress
Upgrading from MPhil to PhD registration
Appointment of external examiners
A forum for review of the PhD
The PhD as a series of projects
Intellectual copyright and appropriate recognition for doctoral
students’ work
The PhD in a practice-based discipline
Professional doctorates
Departmental responsibilities
The departmental research tutor
Improving the selection of students into the department
Selection of supervisors
Guidelines on appropriate supervisory behaviour
Support groups for research students
A departmental doctoral programme
The doctoral cohort system
Action summary
Conclusion

181
183
183
183
184
184
185
186
186
187
187
187
188
189
189
189
190
191
192
192
192

Appendix
References
Index

207
211
215

193
195
196
198
198
200
201
202
203
204
205
206
206

I

I

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH
EDITION
I

I

The gratifying response to the previous editions of this book testifies to the
need of research students and their supervisors to understand the processes
of effective doctoral education. The number of translations into other
languages – Reformed Chinese, Spanish, Portuguese, Classical Chinese,
Russian, Arabic and Korean (in chronological order) – demonstrates that
the issues covered here are highly relevant in many countries. This need to
understand is reinforced by the considerable institutional change taking
place in the higher education system in the UK. Since our first edition in
1987 opened up the subject for debate, many of the developments we have
advocated have come about: greater university recognition and support
for doctoral students, effective monitoring of student progress, training
for supervisors in teaching the craft of research and so on. And the changes
are continuing apace. It is therefore appropriate to offer a fourth edition,
revised and updated to the present situation.
One comment made in the generally favourable reviews of the first edition deserves attention here. In our analysis of the complex tasks of PhD
study, we describe the difficulties which may be encountered. This is in
order to enable both students and supervisors to avoid such problems or to
overcome them. It has been suggested that this inevitably gives too great a
focus on the ‘pathologies’ of the doctoral process. We fear that this may be
true, and so we should like to reiterate here the positive aspects of being a
PhD student. The joys of doing research are considerable, and anyone in a
position to carry out research is indeed privileged. Feelings of exploration,
excitement, challenge, involvement and passion are frequent and are
commented on in this book. The enormous feeling of achievement on the
award of the degree lasts for many throughout their whole lives. Clearly

xiv

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

the process is very rewarding, otherwise so many would not have carried it
through to success.
Similarly it has been pointed out to us that our discussion of the particular issues concerning women, part-time and minority group students,
which looks realistically at the special problems that these groups face and
how they may be ameliorated when they occur, may give the impression
that discrimination is the norm. This, of course, is not so, and as we note,
many universities have procedures for dealing with any that occurs –
although it is not possible to be complacent about the situation.
This book has grown out of EMP’s own PhD research, a continuing series
of studies of research students, our experience of supervising and examining doctoral students and the seminar on the process of PhD-getting conducted by DSP for a number of years at the London Business School and
subsequently by both of us at the Open University. We should like to
acknowledge the help of all those who contributed to those activities over
the years and who, together with those who currently participate in our
seminars, form the ‘cast of characters’ in this book. We learned a lot from
all of them and we are most grateful.
For the fourth edition we received much information, suggestions and
constructive criticism from Hilary Burgess (Open), Iain Cameron (EPSRC),
Linda Conrad (Griffith, Australia), Chris France (Surrey), Jackie Green
(Leeds Metropolitan), Graham Hankinson (London Metropolitan), James
Hartley (Keele), Craig Johnson (Bradford), Shalom Lappin (KCL), Hugh
Matthews (Northampton), John Sparrow (York), Wendy Stainton-Rogers
(Open), Alison Struselis (Northampton), Emma Wakelin (AHRB), Robert
Westaway (Brunel) and Robert White (Southampton). Shona Mullen, our
publisher at Open University Press, gave her usual stalwart support. We are
grateful to them all.
We should like to thank Janet Metcalfe and the UK GRAD Programme,
who are the joint holders of the copyright with DSP, for permission to
reproduce the ‘Self-evaluation questionnaire on research student progress’
on pp. 207ff.
Finally, DSP would like to thank EMP for her generous hospitality
during the writing of this edition of the book.

I

1

I

ON BECOMING A RESEARCH
STUDENT
I

I

This book is a handbook and a survival manual for PhD students. If you are
intending to embark on a research degree it will introduce you to the
system and, by increasing your understanding, help you to improve your
choice of university, college, department and supervisor.
If you have just picked this book up and you are already a research
student, then you should read it thoroughly – and hang on to it so that
you can refer to it frequently. You will need to do this because we shall be
discussing the skills and processes that are crucial to obtaining the PhD
degree.
If you are a supervisor, or contemplating becoming one, the book is
highly relevant to you too, because it deals with the educational processes
that it is your responsibility to encourage for the successful completion of
your students’ research degrees.
If you are a senior academic administrator, the relevance of this book is
that it provides a guide to procedures and systems concerned with research
degrees which will enable you to evaluate the adequacy of the provision
your university is making for research students.
The book focuses on process issues which are not discipline-specific. It
cannot help you to design an investigation or an experiment as these
activities require professional knowledge of your particular field. Similarly
it does not deal with the financial difficulties of doctoral students, which
will vary considerably depending on your circumstances. Nor does it consider factors impinging on you after you have completed your course such
as the employment options available to PhDs. (Delamont and Atkinson
2004 discuss developing a postdoctoral research career.)
But the book does suggest that you ponder on some basic questions

2

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

before embarking on a course of study leading to the PhD degree. Do you
want to spend three to four years of your life doing research on one topic?
Will you be satisfied to live on a student grant for that time? Are you
committed to a PhD or would a professional doctorate (e.g. EdD, EngD)
suit you better? (The differences are discussed on pp. 196ff. of this book.)
Are you able to tolerate regular periods of intellectual loneliness when
only you are responsible for producing ‘creative thoughts’? It is vital that
you give a firm ‘yes’ in answer to all those questions. You must make the
decision to study and work for your doctorate based on the sure knowledge that it is the right thing for you. If what you really want is to write a
bestseller, then conducting research for a thesis is not the optimum way to
go about it. Perhaps you don’t really know what you want to do with the
rest of your life and continuing in the university system seems a good way
of putting off that decision. If this is so then you have chosen an extremely
difficult way of solving your particular problem.

I

The nature of doctoral education

Acquiring the skills and understanding the processes necessary for success
cannot be done at a single reading. As a research student you need continually to use the ideas in this book to develop your own insight into your
own situation. In this way your professional learning will develop as it
should – under your own management.
‘Under your own management’ is the key to the nature of doctoral education. In undergraduate education a great deal, in academic terms, is
organized for the student. It may not have seemed like that to you at the
time, because you were required to do a considerable amount of work, but,
for example, syllabuses were laid down, textbooks were specified, practical
sessions were designed, the examinations were organized to cover a set
range of topics in questions of a known form, and so on. You could quite
reasonably have complained if asked about an extraneous subject, ‘But no
one told me that I was supposed to learn that topic (or methodology or
theory or historical period).’ For the most part you were following an
academic course set by your teachers.
In doctoral education, you have to take responsibility for managing
your learning and for getting yourself a PhD. Of course, there will be
people around to help you: – your supervisor(s), other academics in your
department, fellow students and so on. Some of them will even tell you
what, in their opinion, you have to do to obtain the degree, but the
responsibility for determining what is required, as well as for carrying it
out, remains firmly with you. And if it turns out that you need a particular
topic or theory for your work, then it is no excuse to say, ‘But nobody told
me it was relevant.’ It is your responsibility.

ON BECOMING A RESEARCH STUDENT

I

3

So you will not be traversing a set course laid out by others. You will be
expected to initiate discussions, ask for the help that you need, argue
about what you should be learning, and so on. You are under selfmanagement, so it is no use sitting around waiting for somebody to tell
you what to do next or, worse, complaining that nobody is telling you
what to do next; in the postgraduate world these are opportunities, not
deficiencies.
The overall university framework for research students ensures that
there is a basic similarity for all doctoral candidates as they progress
through their studies. But there are also some notable differences between
the research cultures of university disciplines, particularly between the
culture of the laboratory-based sciences and that of the humanities and
social sciences. To a considerable extent they stem from the large capital
investment in equipment and materials required in scientific research.
Supervisors in science have to take the lead in obtaining the physical
resources and the research personnel required. A studentship may be allocated and a doctoral student recruited specifically to work on a designated
line of research. In this situation the ‘apprenticeship’ aspect of being a
doctoral student is emphasized. The student’s research topic will be clearly
defined to fit in with the innovative thrust of the supervisor’s research
programme, and this will set limits to the level of research creativity that
can be shown. The student will be required to do ‘dogsbody’ work in the
laboratory or on the computer as part of professional training. In these
situations there develops what might be called a ‘joint ownership’ of the
doctoral research between supervisors and the students. Supervisors will
have a strong interest in getting the research work done and using the
results obtained. Joint papers will be the norm. The danger to watch for in
this culture is the exploitation of the student, leading to the feeling of
being just an extra pair of hands for the supervisors’ research. It must be
remembered that there has to be a sufficient amount of autonomy for
the student to be able to make an original contribution. It is this which
justifies the award of the PhD degree.
In contrast, in the humanities and the social sciences students often
come with their own topics within the field in which the supervisor is
expert, and academics give a service of research supervision. Being busy
people, supervisors often have to ration the amount of attention they can
give. Research supervision has to compete with the supervisor’s own current research (which can be considerably different), undergraduate teaching and administration. Supervisors will have only a general interest in the
results of the student’s research, and will act more as role models than as
apprentice-masters. The danger to watch for in this culture is the neglect
of the student for long periods of weeks, months, even years. It must be
remembered that students need the regular support of supervisors if they
are to develop sufficiently to achieve the PhD degree.

4

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

These descriptions are of extreme situations; there are many shades of
grey in between. There are scientists who give an individual service to their
doctoral students and social scientists who build up a team of students all
working on related aspects of the same topic. You must work to understand the situation into which you are entering.
In recent years universities have found that it is not in a student’s best
interest to rely on only one supervisor for each student. Supervisory teams
with two or three members are being established in many departments,
with a lead (or main) supervisor and one or two associate supervisors. This
team must contain a subject specialist and someone responsible for pastoral support. The team system can allow for new supervisors to learn how
to supervise more effectively under the guidance of an experienced member of the department. Others involved in supervision, perhaps at times of
upgrading or controversy, might be the departmental head and the
research tutor.

I

The psychology of being a research student

New research students enter the system determined to make an outstanding contribution to their subject. By the time they start the final stages of
thesis-writing for the degree they are determined to ‘get it and forget it!’
During the intervening years their enthusiasm has been dampened by the
demands of having to concentrate on a specific topic and conduct routine
and repetitive tasks in an atmosphere where nobody seems either to
understand or to care about their work.
They come into the university or college knowing precisely who they
are: successful and intelligent holders of well-earned qualifications. It is
not long before they lose their initial confidence and begin to question
their own self-image. This is the result of contacts (no matter how sporadic
or from what distance) with academic discourse. Such contacts could
come from members of staff, postgraduates who are further into their
research than the first-year students, and papers published in journals or
presented at conferences. These challenge the assumptions and conceptions that the young graduates had accepted as inviolable. From this
period of self-doubt and questioning, the successful postgraduates emerge
with a new identity as competent professionals, able to argue their viewpoint with anybody regardless of status, confident of their own knowledge
but also aware of its boundaries. This new identity permits them to ask for
information when they are aware that they don’t know something and to
express a lack of understanding when this is necessary, instead of pretending that there is no difficulty for fear of being thought stupid. To arrive
at this point is what being a postgraduate research student is really all
about.

ON BECOMING A RESEARCH STUDENT
I

I

5

The aims of this book

The necessity for personal academic initiative is the key cultural change
that doctoral students will encounter compared with their undergraduate
days. It requires a different style of operation, which is why it is not sufficient just to state the issue as we did in the previous sections. Students
need information and insights to develop the capacity to operate successfully in the postgraduate environment. We have seen many students take
long periods (one year or even two!) in adjusting to the environment, at
considerable jeopardy to the achievement of their doctorates. Some
students never come to terms with it and go away indignant, bitter – and
without PhDs.
All new postgraduates have to be prepared to unlearn and rethink many
of the doctrines which they have had to accept up to this point in their
student career. A vital aspect of this rethinking is to take the initiative in
discussing with your supervisor the whole range of your ideas, including
any that might even appear to be ‘off-beat’ or ‘illegitimate’ but may in fact
turn out to be surprisingly useful leads.
The first aim of this book is to explore such issues in a realistic way in
order to help you understand and achieve the tasks necessary to complete
the PhD successfully. Our second complementary aim is to help supervisory practice in managing the process better. The third aim is to put the
whole activity in its context, since the recognition by universities of their
institutional responsibilities in improving the effectiveness of doctoral
education is a key factor in promoting necessary change.
In attempting to achieve these aims we shall be drawing on our experience in doctoral supervision and our systematic research into PhD education. We give real-life examples of students and their supervisors. The ratio
of men to women in the illustrations is consistent with that in higher
education today and covers a range of faculties including Arts, Business
Studies, Science, Social Science, and Technology. We shall be examining
the characteristics of the educational system, the nature of the PhD qualification, psychological aspects of the PhD process, and how to manage
your supervisor, among many other practical topics.
On pp. 207ff at the end of the book we have included a self-diagnostic
questionnaire on student progress to help you focus on issues that are
relevant to you.

I

Action summary

1

Be aware that in doctoral education you are under your own
management and have the responsibility for determining what is
required as well as for carrying it out.

6

I

2

You will experience periods of self-doubt which you must come
through with the clear aim of becoming a competent professional
researcher.
Read this book for insights into the PhD research learning process, to
help you manage it better.

3

HOW TO GET A PhD

I

2

I

GETTING INTO THE SYSTEM
I

I

Once you have decided to continue within the higher education system
and conduct research for a higher degree, you have other decisions to
make. First you have to be accepted by a university department to work in
your chosen area of study. But which university? In what area? And how to
apply?

I

Choosing the institution and ﬁeld of study

If you are a postgraduate who is a candidate for a research studentship, the
offer of such a studentship is likely to be the determining factor in
your choice of institution and field of study. You should, though, satisfy
yourself on two important counts:
1 That the research discipline or area in which the studentship is offered is
genuinely one on which you can see yourself concentrating very closely
for the next three or four years of your life and maybe more. Many PhD
students have come unstuck simply because they have lost interest or
belief in the area that they are investigating.
2 That the university department in which you are being offered the studentship has an established reputation in research and a real commitment to the development of doctoral students. You should not hesitate
to ask about these issues, so important to your success, when you go to a
department for interview. You should collect whatever literature is
available about the department, the staff engaged in research and the
precise nature of that research. Find out the departmental rating in the

8

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

British University Research Assessment Exercise, and how the department intends to develop research in the future. Obtain copies of
research papers and discover as much as you can about the scope of
existing work being done by staff and doctoral students and the possibilities of developing that work into areas of interest to you. Ask to speak
to current doctoral students and obtain from them a description of the
adequacy of the set-up from their point of view.
Accept a studentship only if you are optimistic on both counts – of the
suitability of the institution and of the field of study. This optimism will
fade soon enough as we shall see later on in this book, so it is important to
have some to start off with.
If you are not dependent on a studentship (or if you are fortunate
enough to be offered more than one and have to choose) then you have
a wider range of options, but you will have to work harder to acquaint
yourself with the available possibilities.
One direct way of finding out about the relevant academic activities is to
go to a university library (or look on the Internet) and systematically
review the current issues of journals in your subject. This allows you to
locate the researchers who are publishing relevant work. Remember, all
libraries in higher education will allow readers to have access to their stock
for use on the premises; you just have to ask for permission. You can
obtain good preliminary information through the Internet by using your
search engine to explore the general introductions to a variety of relevant
topics. All universities have websites and all departments have web pages
describing the research that they are currently undertaking.
It is always a good idea, once you have narrowed down your options to a
few departments that appeal to you, to contact those who seem most
likely to be able to discuss your own plans in the light of what they know
to be happening in their unit. You can initiate this contact by letter or
email, followed by a telephone call and – if you are still interested – an
arrangement to meet at the university. You will find that most academics
will be happy to discuss research issues with you. A good way to make
contact with different people and departments is to take advantage of the
open days that so many universities now advertise.
Having got this far, your top priority should be defining more clearly
your field of study. To do this you need to give some thought to your own
interests and how they interact with what you have found out about the
work of the department you are visiting. While it is premature at this stage
to have a complete project worked out, you will need to be able to talk
convincingly about the type of research that appeals to you and why you
are considering applying to that particular department. If you are considering creating a draft proposal, it may be that the department to which
you are applying may be prepared to give you some help in developing it.

GETTING INTO THE SYSTEM

I

9

Other issues to be borne in mind at this point have to do with the
mechanics of getting the work done, for example, access to laboratory
equipment (and what kind of equipment), computers, library facilities,
potential samples and their availability and ease of access, amount of
support from secretarial staff (if any), photocopying facilities and, in the
case of survey research, the potential for help with postage, etc. In
addition, the compatibility of the people with whom you will be working
is an important component in your choice.
If you are contemplating part-time doctoral research, perhaps due to
family responsibilities, essential work commitments or are otherwise subject to geographical constraints in your choice, remember that nowadays
most regions have several institutions of higher learning where research
degrees can be taken. For example, in the West Midlands conurbation
there are at least six universities. You should also consider that you can do
a PhD under the Open University system, which has considerable geographical flexibility. In Chapter 9 we look in more detail at the situation of
part-time research students.
Other universities too offer opportunities for students to conduct
research without having to be resident. They normally require a number of
visits to the campus during a year and even, in some cases, attendance at
residential weekends. Email and Internet technologies have encouraged
the development of more flexible registration arrangements. For these
reasons you must explore thoroughly the range of provision which might
be available for you.

I

The scientiﬁc research programme

If you are a scientist you should consider whether participating as a doctoral student in a major scientific research programme would suit you.
Research students in such a programme are treated as the most junior level
of employee contributing to the overall work, in fact as junior research
assistants. The director of the programme sets very clear constraints on the
work that is to be carried out and submitted for the doctorate and the
student’s contribution is correspondingly restricted in range.
Viewed in educational terms, this type of programme has both advantages and limitations. The three major advantages over the position of the
individual research student are that: the environment continually demonstrates that research matters – a great benefit as compared with the situation of students who have supervisors for whom research cannot be the
top priority; the laboratory is well funded; and the training in professional
practice and the academic issues tackled will be state-of-the-art.
These programmes do have limitations though. First, supervisors tend
to discount the necessity for tutorial support as distinct from managerial

10

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

supervision, since they believe that much of that support is being given by
the group. The close contact that they have with the students in the
laboratory on a day-to-day managerial basis leads many supervisors to
neglect the educational practices that we advocate throughout this book.
Second, directors of research programmes and other senior members
tend to accept the illusory picture of teams of happy researchers working
together toward a common end. This view takes no account of the
students’ competitiveness and their fear of having their ideas or results
stolen by one of their colleagues working on a very closely related problem. The tensions and distrust that can arise among such a group of
beginning professionals – physically close but psychologically isolated –
can be very unsettling.

I

Eligibility

The first question here is: do you have the academic qualifications to be
accepted as a student for a research degree? Most universities require first
or upper second-class honours in a relevant British undergraduate degree;
some universities will accept lower seconds. If you already have a master’s
degree it is usually acceptable, whatever the class of your undergraduate
degree.
These are the general requirements which will allow you to go through
straightforwardly. If you do not have them it does not mean that you will
not be accepted, only that a special case has to be made, which will require
the strong backing of your potential supervisor. For example, if you do not
have a British degree, the university will have to satisfy itself that your
overseas degree is of a standard equivalent to a British one. Or you may
have a non-degree professional qualification plus considerable practical
experience, on which a special case could be made for your acceptance.
In general we would say that you should not be immediately deterred if
you do not have the typical formal qualifications for acceptance. Always
explore with potential supervisors whether a special case can be made. It
may be, for example, that you could be accepted subject to doing certain
extra study, or passing a qualifying examination. Remember too that if
one institution rejects you, it does not mean that all will. However, if you
have had several rejections it may not be wise to pursue registration. You
may need to review your likelihood of success and come to a more realistic
estimate of your abilities.
The second question is: what degree are you going to be registered for? If
you are a beginner in research and do not already have an MPhil or an
MRes (i.e., a master’s degree awarded for research) you will, in the first
place, be registered as a general research student or for an MPhil degree.
You will often be required to take some taught courses before embarking

GETTING INTO THE SYSTEM

I

11

on your thesis work. You may be required to complete successfully a oneyear taught programme leading to the award of the MRes degree. The
decision on formal registration for the PhD is then taken after the first year
of your research when there is some indication that the work is progressing satisfactorily. You and your supervisor(s) must, therefore, be in close
contact to ensure that the case can be made for full PhD registration. At
this stage a title for the thesis and the intended programme of research are
presented.
The third question is concerned with the limits of the period allowed
between registration and submission. For full-time students there will be a
formal minimum time (three or four years) and a formal maximum (four
or five years) after which registration will lapse and a special (and very
persuasive) case will need to be made for reinstatement. Because of this
maximum limit, if you are having to abandon your research work temporarily but intend to return to it, you should obtain a formal suspension of
the period of study.
For part-time students the time limits are set roughly pro rata: four to
five years minimum, seven to eight years maximum. Don’t forget that if
you are employed by your institution as, say, a research assistant, you may
find that you can be counted as a full-time student even if you are working
only part-time on your PhD. This fudge is allowed because the basic nature
of the PhD is as a professional training, and research assistants get a great
deal of this training as part of their jobs.
When registration has been completed you should be informed formally
of: your supervisor(s); the topic or field of study for which you have been
accepted; the minimum length of study time required before submission
of your thesis.
Continuing registration in succeeding years is usually dependent on
adequate progress being made each year, and a report to this effect has
to be submitted by your supervisor. Do ensure that it is sent at the
appropriate time.

I

Grants and research support

It may be that you will qualify for a grant from the government, a university or a private foundation. The availability of grants is variable, and
the regulations on eligibility detailed. Nevertheless if you are British or
from the EU or have lived in the UK for three years or more, it would be
worth your while investigating the possibilities. You may find that you fall
into a category for whom special grants are available. The best place to
start to explore these possibilities would be with your university careers
service who will help you to discover what may be available. There is a
Grants and Trusts Directory (which includes benevolent funds) to look at,

12

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

and the website <www.funderfinder.org.uk> is a useful starting point for further exploration. If you find that you meet their criteria, you would be well
advised to apply far in advance of their advertised cut-off date. However,
do not build up too much hope at this stage because many of these grants
are very specific indeed and can be quite small.
You must obtain and study the regulations of the formal system concerned with these topics. You should also be aware that exceptions can be
made, and this may be worth exploring. Your financial situation should be
part of your initial discussion with your potential supervisor.
If you are awarded a studentship, it will be for a set period (three or four
years). There are considerable variations in the operation of grants. Some
are tied to specific research projects, some come from research councils
and may require you to take particular courses in the first year (which may
lead to an MRes, the so-called ‘1+3 system’), some are linked to industrial
collaboration. Remember that in certain circumstances it may be possible
to obtain an extension of the grant. You have to keep your supervisor
aware of this possibility and make sure that a strongly supported
application is made at the appropriate time.
Grants are quite low in value, and it may be that you will be hoping for
some casual work. Try to obtain some professional work which helps your
academic development if at all possible. It is much better to tutor your
subject than to work long hours serving behind a bar.
While academic institutions are no longer regarded as being in loco
parentis, they may act as quasi-employers if you have a grant that they
administer. Some, like any good employer, will make small short-term
loans to cover an urgent financial problem. These can be repaid by
instalments.
Find out from your university what you are statutorily entitled to in the
way of research resources. These might include a desk, lab space, equipment and consumable resources (for example, chemicals for your project). You should ensure (via your supervisor, if necessary) that you have
them. You also need to be aware that there are often discretionary
opportunities available. You may be able to call on technical support
from departmental technicians and computer staff, and you may be
entitled to apply for financial support for travel to conferences or to visit
other institutions.

I

Distance supervision?

There have always been people who, while wishing to study for a higher
degree by research, are unable physically to attend regularly at a university. These include potential students who live in areas with no university provision, people with disabilities, carers and those with young

GETTING INTO THE SYSTEM

I

13

children who are able to work in their own environment but would be
unable to attend university at regular required times.
With the growth of IT (information technology) it is becoming increasingly possible for research work to be carried out from your own home.
Libraries can be accessed from home, the Internet carries vast information
loads. You can be in communication with your supervisor, academics in
your field, and fellow students from any university by email. Students may
expect a much better level of supervision than would have been the case
previously if they have to go abroad for any reason during the course of
their studies (e.g., the fieldwork period for anthropology and geology
students).
This is not to suggest that the doctoral supervision process can be carried
out entirely at a distance, however. The regular interaction needed with
the supervisor must inevitably take place face to face in order for student
and supervisor to spark ideas off each other. It is this process which moves
the research forward creatively. While IT can help the supervisory process
to become more effective, it cannot completely replace personal interaction. All British universities insist on a certain period of attendance on
campus during the course of study. It is therefore not realistic for a potential student to consider applying to work for a PhD degree completely at a
distance.

I

Choosing your work context

An important aspect of the quality of your working life as a research student is your work context. Where precisely will you be spending most of
your time in the next few years? If you are in a position to make a choice of
research institutions, you should certainly find out about the physical
facilities offered and take them into account.
Some universities provide study cubicles for postgraduates, some a student common room and some give their research students a desk in a
small shared room similar to those used by members of staff. Since personal computers, email and Internet technologies are such an integral part
of research activity, it is important to discover what arrangements are
made in this area. Some universities are in a position to offer the use of a
PC (personal computer) to all doctoral students. If they do not, and you do
not already have a machine, you must buy one. It is a key tool of your
work. All universities should offer you participation in their email network
and access to the Internet.
There are universities which make little or no physical provision for
doctoral students. They are expected to work at home when not in
libraries, laboratories, other organizations or away on field trips.
It may be that you prefer the congenial company of others in a similar

14

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

situation and like the idea of being able to find a corner in a large room set
aside solely for the use of research students. On the other hand, you may
find it irritating having to interact with others and listen to what they
have to say about their own progress (or lack of it) whenever you want to
use the common room as a base from which to get on with your own work.
Perhaps you are a loner and enjoy the discipline of long hours spent
poring over books or documents when not engaged in experimentation or
other forms of data collection. You favour a clear dividing line between
working hours and time spent socializing and are able to organize this
division of activity satisfactorily yourself. Once again, you may discover
that the isolation this type of work context imposes on you results in
feelings of alienation and a lack of contact with others who could
stimulate discussion and collaborate in the production of new ideas.
Some people believe that being given a desk in a room shared by only
one or two other research students is an ideal arrangement. They have
their own personal corner where they can keep their books and writing
materials, interview others and chat with their room-mates, as well as
having easy and constant access to their supervisors and other members of
staff. However, the reality is not always like that, and you may find that
you are thrown into close contact with people whom you find quite
intolerable for some reason or other. Perhaps one of them leaves chewing
gum all over the place, while another is constantly talking or entertaining
friends when you wish to concentrate on your work. One is very untidy
and continually ‘borrows’ your possessions without returning them, as
well as spreading items that do not belong to you all over your designated
work area. Another is intrusive in other ways: perhaps there are too many
questions about your personal life or too much discussion of others’
problems and successes.
In addition, your presence and absence are easily noted by others, and
you may have to account for your movements rather more than you
would wish. Also, your supervisor ‘just along the corridor’ may not be
quite as accessible as at first appears.

I

Selecting your supervisor

This is probably the most important step you will have to take. In general
students do not select their supervisors: their supervisors are allocated by
the department or, in fewer cases, their supervisors may have selected
them.
However, it is not impossible to influence the selection yourself and you
should certainly attempt to do so. There is certain basic information that
you need in order to be confident that a particular academic is an
appropriate person to supervise you. The key factor is whether they have

GETTING INTO THE SYSTEM

I

15

an established research record and are continuing to contribute to the
development of their discipline. The questions you need to ask yourself
include the following: Have they published research papers recently? Do
they hold research grants or contracts? Is the lab efficiently organized? Are
they invited to speak at conferences in Britain and abroad? Positive
answers to at least some of these questions are desirable.
Another important aspect that you should be considering when
selecting your supervisor is: how close a relationship do you want? The
supervisor–student relationship is one of the closest that you will ever be
involved in. Even marriage partners do not spend long hours every day in
close contact with each other, but this could be the case with a student and
a supervisor. Some people need to have their supervisors around a lot
(especially in the beginning), while others feel it oppressive to be asked
what they are doing, and to be told continually what they should be
getting on with next.
There are at least two patterns from which to choose with regard to
working with your supervisor. The first has already been mentioned: the
student needs constant support and reassurance, and the supervisor needs
continual feedback in order to give instruction, thus providing direction
for the research. The second pattern is a relationship in which the student
needs time to think about the work to be done and needs the freedom to
make mistakes during early attempts to get started, before discussing what
has been happening with the supervisor. In this relationship the supervisor must feel relaxed about giving the student time to learn by trial and
error. Such supervisors are content to give guidance at regular intervals
rather than the direction provided by those who stay much closer to the
students and their work.
Research has shown (Phillips 1994a) that when a student who needs
time to plan work and to continue unhurriedly until satisfied that there is
something interesting to impart is paired with a supervisor who constantly asks for worthwhile results, the student becomes irritated and feels
that the standards required are unattainable. The supervisor feels that the
postgraduate is too cautious and unable to work alone. Conversely, when
a student who needs constant feedback and encouragement is paired with
a supervisor who wants to be kept informed of progress and ideas only at
intervals that allow for some development to have occurred, the student
feels neglected and the supervisor resents the student’s demands for
attention (if the student is actually confident enough to ask for more
time).
Good communication and rapport between students and their supervisors are the most important elements of supervision. Once the personal
relationship has been well-established, all else falls into place. If interpersonal compatibility is missing everything else to do with being a
research student is perceived negatively. Therefore, it cannot be stressed

16

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

too strongly that you should discuss this relationship at the very earliest
opportunity, and a tentative agreement about working together should be
reached.

I

Starting out as a research student

In general, universities put very limited efforts into induction procedures
for newcomers into the higher degree system or into the role of research
student. Those who have recently attained a high-quality first degree share
with their peers who have returned to university after some years of working the confusion and disorientation that comes from not quite knowing
what is expected of them.
Often new research students have the idea that people who possess a
PhD degree are outstandingly brilliant. This idea inhibits their own development as they are equally sure that they are not outstandingly brilliant,
and therefore cannot really expect to be awarded a PhD. Similarly, if they
actually read any completed theses (this is not the norm and will be discussed in detail later) they often emerge convinced that they would never
be able to write anything even remotely resembling such a document
either in length or quality.
The world that the new research student enters, classically portrayed as
an ‘ill-defined limbo’ (Wason 1974) involves making a traumatic intellectual transition. It also involves the phenomenon of ‘unlearning existing expertise’ and having to start from the very beginning in order to
discover slowly what one is supposed to be doing. During this period
students might question the whole point of their being in the university.
You should, therefore, make every effort to mitigate these unpleasant
beginnings by agreeing a small initial project with definite deadlines at an
early interview with your supervisor. The agreement should include the
understanding that, once the work has been completed, you will discuss
with your supervisor both the work itself and your feelings about it. This
exercise will help to clarify any doubts about your ability to undertake
research and written work. It will also help to reveal the evolutionary
process (corrections, drafts, rewritings, etc.) inevitably involved in the
production of theses, articles and books to publication standard which
you have just read with such admiration.
It is also a good idea to talk to other research students about their experience of the role as well as their work. Sharing apprehensions helps to
resolve them through the knowledge that the problem is not an individual
one, but one that is inbuilt into a less than perfect system. There are
indeed guidelines which universities are advised to follow in providing
support for their doctoral students. Your student representative can help
you in accessing these should it ever be necessary.

GETTING INTO THE SYSTEM
I

I

17

Myths and realities of the system

The ‘ivory tower’
One of the commonest misconceptions about research is that it is an ‘ivory
tower’ activity, far removed from reality and from social contact with
others. If you say you are doing research, people will often talk to you as
though you had decided to spend a number of years in solitary confinement from which, in due course, you will emerge with your new
discoveries.
It is not like that at all. Although there are considerable periods when
you will be working on your own (thinking and writing, for example) this
is not the whole story. There is also a considerable academic network of
people with whom, as an active researcher, you must interact. These
include your supervisors, other academics in your department, the general
library staff, the specialist librarian who deals with computer-based literature searches, visiting academics giving seminars, colleagues giving papers
at conferences – the list is very considerable. To be an effective research
student you must make use of all the opportunities offered. Research is
an interactive process and requires the development of social, as well as
academic, skills.

Personal relationships
Another popular misconception, this time of supervisors, is to believe that
so long as they are on first-name terms with their research students everything is fine and the student knows that they are friends. Some supervisors
even invite their students to their homes or take them to the pub for a
drink in order to reinforce this camaraderie. But no matter how far the
supervisors may go to assure new students that their relationship is that of
friendly colleagues, the reality is that students take a considerable amount
of time to become comfortable about this degree of informality. This is as
true of mature students as of the more traditional new graduate.
The reason for the students’ difficulty is that the supervisors already
have that which the students most want – the PhD. They have the title of
‘Dr’ and are acknowledged experts in the chosen field of their research
students. The students have admired the supervisors’ work during their
undergraduate days, having come into contact with it through lectures or
reading, or having heard reference made to it by others. They feel privileged to be working so closely with such individuals, and are aware of the
supervisors’ authority in the subject and power in the relationship.
You may be in a department with many research students or perhaps
you are the only one in your discipline. Either way you will probably meet
others at an induction seminar, introductory lecture or other meeting for
new higher degree students arranged by your university or student union.

18

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

Even if the people you meet are in different faculties, working on topics far
removed from your own, it will be helpful for you to have contact with
them. Since they are at the same stage as you, they have some understanding of your own experience. Make it one of your first tasks to get the names
and email addresses of a few of your peers. Use this list to get in touch with
them to form a mutually beneficial support group. Throughout the whole
of your course this group will enable you to compare not only how your
research is progressing, but also your feelings about it. The reality of this
situation is that all personal relationships within the academic community, as elsewhere, have to be worked at and take time to develop.

Teamworking
‘I work alone in a lab, full of people, all research students, all working
alone.’ This quotation is from Diana, a student in biochemistry, who was
part of a ‘team’ of research students who were all engaged in the search for
an effective anti-cancer drug. It exemplifies the situation in scientific
research in which a large programme is being funded and the professors
who hold the grants gather around them several research students. Each
student is working on a specific problem. Each problem is closely linked to
all the others. In theory there is a free exchange of information and the
whole group works in harmony. In some programmes though, research
students take care to guard closely the work for which they are responsible
because they occasionally fear that one of the others may discover something that will render their own research unworthy of continuation.
The PhD is awarded for original work. Postgraduates working on a programme such as the one described have two worries: first, that another
student’s work so closely borders on their own that it will make their work
unoriginal or second past the post; second, that somebody else will demonstrate something (for which that other person will be awarded a PhD)
that will at the same time show their own line of research to be false.
What is needed is collaboration, not competition, between people who
should be making each other’s work more comprehensible and less alienating. In well managed laboratories there are regular group meetings to
ensure that there is a general knowledge of the work that is being undertaken, and good communication about the issues and difficulties
involved. Yet often students experience alienation and isolation as the
overriding themes of their postgraduate days. The strange thing about this
is that sometimes the science students appear to feel the isolation more
strongly than their counterparts in the Social Sciences or Arts faculties.
This is because within the sciences there is the illusion of companionship,
and the expectations of new postgraduates are that they will be part of a
group of friends, as well as a work group. In other faculties new research
students expect to be working alone in libraries or at home, reading,

GETTING INTO THE SYSTEM

I

19

writing and thinking rather than experimenting. Any socializing that may
take place as a result of a seminar, shared room or organized event is
perceived as a bonus.

I

Action summary

1

Get as much information as you can before choosing your academic
institution. Use the Internet and visit the places beforehand to talk
to potential supervisors. Find out about the research culture: is it
programme based or individually orientated? Ask to see around the
area in which your work will be carried out to determine whether it
would suit you.
Find out about a potential supervisor’s research experience, publishing record and supervisory management style before making your
decision.
Ensure that you understand the eligibility requirements both for
entry into the research degree programme of the university and of
grant-awarding bodies. Know whether you conform to them or can
make a special case for exceptional treatment.
Very early on, arrange with your main supervisor to carry out a small
initial project with definite deadlines to get you into the system. On
completion and writing up, discuss not only the results but also how
you went about it and what you can learn about the process.
Work at personal relationships with your supervisor(s) and fellow
doctoral students. Set limited goals and achieve them.

2

3

4

5

I

3

I

THE NATURE OF THE PhD
QUALIFICATION
I

I

In this chapter we shall discuss the nature of a PhD. We shall consider
the objectives of the process, the part that it plays in the academic system,
and the inevitably different aims the students, the supervisors and the
examiners bring to it.

I

The meaning of a doctorate

We are going to start with some historical background and present in a
schematic way the meaning of the degree structure of a British university.
ⵧ A bachelor’s degree traditionally meant that the recipient had obtained
a general education (specializing at this level is a relatively recent
nineteenth-century development).
ⵧ A master’s degree is a licence to practise. Originally this meant to
practise theology, that is, to take a living in the Church, but now there
are master’s degrees across a whole range of disciplines: business
administration, soil biology, computing, applied linguistics and so on.
The degree marks the possession of advanced knowledge in a specialist
field.
ⵧ A doctor’s degree historically was a licence to teach – meaning to teach
in a university as a member of a faculty. Nowadays this does not mean
that becoming a lecturer is the only reason for taking a doctorate, since
the degree has much wider career connotations outside academia and
many of those with doctorates do not have academic teaching posts.
The concept stems, though, from the need for a faculty member to be

THE NATURE OF THE PhD QUALIFICATION

I

21

an authority, in full command of the subject right up to the boundaries
of current knowledge, and able to extend them. As the highest degree
that can be awarded, it proclaims that the recipient is worthy of being
listened to as an equal by the appropriate university faculty.
Traditionally the doctorates of British universities have been named for
the particular faculty, for example: DD (Divinity), MD (Medicine), LLD
(Law), DMus (Music), DSc (Science), DLitt (Letters, i.e. Arts). These socalled ‘higher doctorates’ are awarded as a recognition of a substantial
contribution to the discipline by published work. In British universities
the Doctor of Philosophy degree is a comparatively recent concept – an
early twentieth-century import from the United States. Some universities
abbreviate the title to DPhil (e.g., Oxford, Sussex, York) but most use the
designation PhD, which we use throughout this book. Whatever the
abbreviation, the degree is the same. It represents a more restricted
achievement than the higher doctorates since it envisages a limited
amount of academic work (three years or so), but it still embodies the
concept that the holder of the PhD is in command of the field of study and
can make a worthwhile contribution to it.
There are a number of exceptions to these descriptions of the meaning
of the degree titles, since British universities pride themselves on their
independence. Traditionally, once an institution had become a university
there were no laws that specified which degrees could be awarded, by
which institutions, to whom and on what basis, as was the case in Continental Europe. This has now changed, as the Government has decided to
designate certain Higher Education Colleges as ‘Teaching Universities’,
without giving them the right to award research degrees.
Historically this independence has allowed, for example, the arts faculties of traditional Scottish universities to use the MA title for their first
degree, but the science faculties use BSc. Traditionally there was no extra
examination for an MA degree at Oxford and Cambridge, only a requirement to continue attendance at a college for a further two years. Nowadays this has been reduced to paying a registration fee after two years and
obtaining the degree without attendance. In medicine the practice is even
stranger: general medical practitioners are given the honorary title of
Doctor although they do not have a doctorate from their universities.
Indeed, on the basis of their university course they are credited with two
bachelor’s degrees, although having a licence to practise they exemplify
the concept of a master’s degree. There are, of course, good historical
reasons for these anomalies.

22

I

I

Becoming a fully professional researcher

HOW TO GET A PhD

Thus the holder of a PhD is someone who is recognized as an authority by
the appropriate faculty and by fellow academics and scientists outside the
university. In modern terms it is useful to think of this as becoming a fully
professional researcher in your field. Let us try to spell out what becoming
a full professional means:
1 At the most basic level it means that you have something to say that
your peers want to listen to.
2 In order to do this you must have a command of what is happening in
your subject so that you can evaluate the worth of what others are
doing.
3 You must have the astuteness to discover where you can make a useful
contribution.
4 You must be aware of the ethics of your profession and work within
them.
5 You must have mastery of appropriate techniques that are currently
being used, and also be aware of their limitations.
6 You must be able to communicate your results effectively in the
professional arena.
7 All this must be carried out in an international context; your professional peer group is worldwide. (It always was, of course, but the rate of
diffusion is infinitely faster than it used to be and with the World Wide
Web is still accelerating.) You must be aware of what is being discovered,
argued about, written and published by your academic community
across the world.
This list clearly represents quite a tall order, not least because, as you will
have spotted, most of the list concerns the learning of skills, not knowledge. The crucial distinction is between ‘knowing that’ and ‘knowing
how’, as the philosopher Gilbert Ryle put it. It is not enough for someone
to tell you that this is a fruitful area for study, that this technique is available for use, that you should write a clear paper communicating your
contribution. You have to be able to carve out a researchable topic, to
master the techniques required and put them to appropriate use, and to
cogently communicate your findings.
So there are craft skills involved in becoming a full professional, which,
like any skills, have to be learned by doing the task in practice situations
under supervision. The skills required cannot easily be stated by other
professionals, though many aspects can be learned from them – some
consciously, others unconsciously. But there have to be the twin elements
of exploration and practice, which are basic to all learning of skills. This is
why the PhD takes time.
As though this were not enough, there is a further complication. When

THE NATURE OF THE PhD QUALIFICATION

I

23

you are doing a PhD, you are playing in a game where the goalposts are
continually being moved. Obviously, what is good professional practice
today may tomorrow be inadequate. What is a reasonable contribution to
a new topic now might be old hat by next year. So a final and crucial skill
which professionals must acquire is the ability to evaluate and re-evaluate
their own work and that of others in the light of current developments.
They need to be able to grow with their discipline.
It is these skills that you are trying to acquire when you embark on a
PhD, and the purpose of the exercise is to become a fully professional
researcher and to be able to demonstrate that you are one. It is important
to keep this professional concept in mind because it orientates everything
that you have to do. For example, you are not doing research in order to do
research; you are doing research in order to demonstrate that you have
learned how to do research to fully professional standards (more about the
implications of this later in this chapter).
You are not writing a review of your field of study because that would be
an interesting thing to do, or because ‘everybody does one’ (although both
of these may be true). You are writing a review because it gives you an
opportunity to demonstrate that you have learned how to take command
of the material with the maturity and grasp of the full professional (more
about this in Chapter 6).
Notice that the key concept is to demonstrate that your learning is to
professional standards. How will you know whether it is? This is probably
the most crucial thing that you have to learn – from your supervisor and
from published work in your field. It is indeed a vital responsibility of your
supervisor to ensure that you are given every opportunity to become
familiar with appropriate professional standards. It is only through this
familiarity that you will be able to recognize and achieve them.
One thing is clear: you cannot get a PhD unless you do know what the
standards are. This is because of the aims of the whole doctoral process.
These are not just to allow you in due course to have the title ‘Doctor’,
pleasant though this is and proud though your family will be. When the
examiners, on behalf of the university and the academic community,
award the degree and recognize you as a fully professional researcher, what
they are primarily concerned with is that you should ‘join the club’ and
continue your contribution to developing your discipline through
research and scholarship throughout your career. They hope that you will
publish papers from your doctoral thesis and continue to research and
publish in the field to establish your academic authority, so that, in due
course, you will supervise and examine other people’s PhD theses.
This is in fact the aim of the whole exercise: to get you to the level where
you can supervise and examine others’ PhDs with authority. Thus clearly
you must have the professional skills and you must know the standards
that are required. Two immediate corollaries of this fact are:

24

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

ⵧ Quite early on in the process you must begin to read other PhD theses
in your field so that you can discover what the standards are. How else
will you know what standard you ought to aim for?
ⵧ If you have to go along to your supervisor after you have done your
work and ask if it is good enough, you are clearly not ready for a PhD,
which is awarded as a recognition that you are able to evaluate research
work (including your own) to fully professional standards.

I

Differences between the MPhil and the PhD

The MPhil is clearly a less advanced qualification than the PhD in which
the student is expected to master a content area and can be completed in
two years’ full-time study. The MPhil dissertation is normally shorter than
the PhD thesis. It is often used as a training course in advanced research
work, and can be a preliminary stage for the PhD where it is necessary to
learn the fundamentals of research and acquire new techniques, although
more and more the newly introduced MRes is being used for this purpose. The MPhil is also a legitimate higher degree qualification in its own
right.
As with the PhD, it is not possible to spell out in bureaucratic detail what
is required to obtain the MPhil in your subject now. You need to read
successful dissertations in order to discover the standards expected. Here,
but only in very general terms, are some ways in which the MPhil has been
held to differ from the PhD.
A candidate for an MPhil must undertake an investigation but, compared to the PhD, the work may be limited in scope and the degree of
originality. Considerably more emphasis is put on original work in the
PhD and the PhD thesis involves greater depth than an MPhil dissertation. Greater synthesis and critical ability and also a more detailed
investigation of any practical illustrations are expected from doctoral
candidates.
The MPhil can be limited to the replication of research already published. It is also acceptable for secondary sources to be used. This means
that for an MPhil it is legitimate to quote some authority quoting somebody else, for example, ‘Francis gives several definitions of originality
(Phillips and Pugh 2005)’. This would not be acceptable for a PhD thesis
where the candidate for the degree would be expected to have read and
evaluated Francis in the original publication.
In addition, although a full summary of literature is required, it does not
have to be an evaluative review as in the PhD. The difference here is in the
breadth and depth of the review as well as in the amount of critical
appreciation that is expected. In a high quality MPhil, evidence is required
of the ability to test ideas; understand appropriate techniques; make use of

THE NATURE OF THE PhD QUALIFICATION

I

25

published work and source material; and show familiarity with different
theories and empirical studies.
Each university will have its own regulations concerning the MPhil
degree and you must study carefully those which apply to you.

I

Aims of students

There are many reasons why people decide to work towards a PhD. One of
the most common aims at the beginning is the wish to make a significant
contribution to the chosen field. In these cases students have become particularly interested in a topic during the course of their undergraduate
degrees (or perhaps while working in their profession) and wish to add
something to the current state of knowledge. For example Adam, who
after graduating in architecture, had spent some years both teaching and
working as an architect, explained why he had returned to university in
the following way:
I wanted to do more theoretical work as my interests were with the
value problems in designing a building. How does the architect make
decisions about features that will affect the behaviour of those using
the building without ever having a consultation with the prospective
users? This interest was an extension of my direction as an undergraduate and my observations during my working career. I saw it as a
serious problem and a major issue in professional practice.
Greg, a history student, said he wanted to gain a PhD because:
It was an opportunity to continue research I had started for my MA.
To me a PhD means that the candidate has made some new contribution to his field and that’s really what I want to do. Up until now I’ve
never really considered doing the next degree until I had almost
finished the previous one. I don’t need the PhD for my work – it
might even be a disadvantage.
Greg’s sentiments are not echoed by all research students, as another
important aim for many postgraduates is to enhance career opportunities
and future earning capacity through possession of the PhD degree. Some
decide on this course of action when considering plans for the future.
Others, like Freddy, who was studying industrial chemistry, decide on
research when they find it more difficult than they had expected to get a
job in industry straight from university:
The head of department where I did my first degree offered me a
research post, so I agreed after he gave me an outline of the research
area.

26

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

There are other career reasons for wanting to take a doctorate. Some
students find that they are being called ‘Dr’ by people coming in to the
laboratory or hospital department where they work and feel guilty at
accepting the title they have not yet achieved. Others feel that relationships with their medical colleagues may be easier if they too have the title.
Some are embarrassed at being alone in their academic group without a
title and succumb to their feelings of peer pressure in order to conform.
Another reason for undertaking a research degree after doing well at
undergraduate level is simply taking up the offer of a studentship as a form
of employment and without having any real career aims. All of these
motives are far removed from the idealistic view of the PhD student as
somebody dedicated to advancing knowledge and potentially worthy of
becoming an undisputed expert in a given field.
These diverse aims of students do not remain the same throughout the
period of registration for the higher degree, however, not even for those
students who do start because of the intrinsic satisfaction of actually doing
research and because of their interest in the work for its own sake. The
following description of his decision to work for the PhD was given by
Bradley, who was studying in the English department of a university:
I couldn’t think of a more fulfilling or pleasurable way of spending
my time. It’s almost instinctive. I haven’t weighed up the pros and
cons, it was an emotional decision really.
As we discuss fully in Chapter 7 on the PhD process, all these students,
together with very many more enthusiastic new recruits, change their way
of talking about their PhD as the years of learning to do research and
become a full professional pass by. Towards the end their aims become
narrower: simply to reach the goal of the PhD – ‘got to get it’ – or else to
complete an unfinished task – ‘must finish’.
It is important that research students eventually realize that it is
determination and application, rather than brilliance, that are needed.
The sooner you learn this the better. Conducting a piece of research to a
successful conclusion is a job of work that has to be done just like any
other job of work. Also, just like any other job of work, an important
objective should be to make a success of what you have set out to do.

I

Aims of supervisors

In the same way that students begin a PhD for a variety of different
reasons, so too supervisors undertake supervision with different aims in
mind. There are those who wish to add to their reputation for having a
large number of successful research students of high calibre. With each
additional success their own professional status is raised. Of course, the

THE NATURE OF THE PhD QUALIFICATION

I

27

converse is also true: it is possible for academics to go down in the estimation of their peers by having a succession of students who drop out, do
work of poor quality or take an exceptional amount of time to complete
their theses. But those supervisors who have one or more ex-research
students who are now professors speak of the achievements of these
graduates as though they were their own.
There are at least two kinds of supervisor. Some supervisors believe that
postgraduates should be encouraged to become autonomous researchers.
Others believe they should be encouraged to become extremely efficient
research assistants. Some supervisors have not really thought about this
matter specifically but nevertheless treat their research students in such a
way that it is relatively simple to deduce which implicit theory of doctoral
education and training they hold.
Some supervisors are dedicated to developing their favoured area of
research by having several people exploring different, but related, problems. These people aim to build centres of excellence around themselves,
which will attract visiting academics from other universities and other
countries. In this way they are able to spend some time discussing their
work with other specialists. They may also be able to arrange an occasional
seminar given by a well-known expert. Students of these academics are
likely to find that they are given small, well-defined problems that closely
border the research problems being pursued by other researchers attached
to their supervisor.
There are also those few senior academics who aim to become eligible
for a Nobel prize or other senior honour. What this means for their students is that they will be treated as research assistants and expected to do
the work set out for them by the professor, in the limited manner of a
subordinate.
As well as those who wish to get the work done as speedily and efficiently as possible, there are those supervisors who are genuinely interested in producing more and better researchers. They are prepared to offer
a service of supervision to research students in the same way as they offer a
service of teaching to undergraduate students. What this means for students is that they will be expected to develop their own topics for research
and to operate in a more individual manner. This approach gives more
autonomy but entails a more restricted academic peer group.
Thus supervisors have many different reasons for agreeing to add to
work already being undertaken by engaging in the supervision of research
students. Not all of these aims are mutually exclusive. It is necessary, however, for students to discover which approach a prospective supervisor
favours in order to evaluate the implications for what will be expected of
them.
It is also important for incoming doctoral students to be clear whether
they wish to become autonomous researchers or superior research

28

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

assistants, as well as for supervisors to become aware of which type of
researcher is best suited to help them further their own aims.
Of course, we realize that it will be difficult for you, as a beginning
research student, to understand fully the implications of this discussion. It
will be even more difficult to act on such considerations. Two things that
you could do are: talk to other research students in the department about
their experience of supervision, and introduce into the preliminary discussions with any potential supervisor an exploration of their preferred
way of working with their students.

I

Aims of examiners

External examiners are academics from universities other than your own
and are used to ensure that, within a given discipline, standards of quality
for which the PhD degree is awarded are uniform across universities. Some
examiners see the aims of the PhD to be a training for a career in research,
some as an introduction to writing books, some as preparation for the
academic life and some, as we have suggested, to become a fully rounded
professional.
Whether examiners are more interested in the research, the thesis or the
performance of the candidate in the oral examination, they are looking for
a command of the subject area (or context) of the research, as well as the
specific topic. The British PhD is awarded for an original contribution to
knowledge. Yet, as we shall see in Chapter 6, originality in the PhD is a
complex concept which has not yet been adequately defined. Nevertheless, examiners need to be satisfied that the work has a degree of originality
and that it is the genuine work of the candidate.
Examiners acquire reputations for their performance in this role. Some
become known as difficult to please while others are prepared to take the
supervisor’s evaluation of the work almost without question. Some examiners make the oral examination a real test of professional knowledge and
exposition, while others allow it to be more of a relaxed conversation
between friends.
The reputations that the examiners acquire do sometimes affect their
selection, especially when it is left to the supervisor to choose. Some candidates find that their external examiners have been chosen on the basis of
how highly their supervisors regard the students’ work. For example, if a
supervisor thinks that a particular student will only just satisfy requirements, a less exacting examiner may be chosen. If, on the other hand, the
supervisor considers the student’s work to be of considerable merit a tough
examiner is chosen and the student then has the advantage of being
passed by somebody who adds prestige to the new PhD’s success. However,
such a system is far from universal and can be extremely unpopular.

THE NATURE OF THE PhD QUALIFICATION

I

29

Dr George, a supervisor who also has special responsibility for research
students in his department said: ‘I’m against the practice of getting a lesser
academic, or a friend, for a weaker student but I know it happens and it has
happened here.’

I

Aims of universities and research councils

Government-funded research councils provide studentships for British
full-time doctoral students in science and social science, as does the British
Academy for arts students. In the past they have taken a fairly relaxed view
in evaluating what happened after the studentship had been awarded,
considering this a matter for the academic discretion of the particular
department and supervisor involved, but this is no longer so.
The commonest way of not succeeding is to drop out. Very few people
actually fail. The historically high drop-out rate of students has led the
councils in the past decade to require universities to demonstrate that
they have an effective student support system in place. They have
issued guidelines on what is good practice in matters such as induction
sessions for new students, research environments, supervisory arrangements and appeals and complaints procedures. They have issued league
tables of completion rates and universities who do not perform satisfactorily run the risk of not receiving any allocation of research student
grants. The universities can apply for reinstatement after a period when
they have to demonstrate that their support arrangements have
improved.
The effect of these policies has been to make academic institutions
much more concerned to control the education which takes place during
the PhD to ensure that it is of high quality. They have reviewed their
supervisory practices, established doctoral programmes, strengthened the
procedures for monitoring the progress of research students, and so on.
Academics with overall departmental responsibility for doctoral students
have been appointed. This book itself is an illustration of the way in which
attempts are continually being made to make the doctoral educational
process more effective.
The aim of research councils is to get a high proportion of full-time
doctoral students to complete within four years, and universities work to
bring this about. The criterion of a successful completion for these purposes is defined as: the submission of the thesis for first examination four
years after registration as a full-time student. Any referral as a result of the
examination is not taken into account.
From the student’s point of view the positive effects are that much more
interest and care are being devoted to making the process work efficiently,
and you should make sure that you get the benefits of these developments.

30

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

A possible negative effect is that you may be forced to take a narrower view
of your research than you might like in order to complete within the stated
time. Always remember, though, that there will be opportunities for
further research on related issues after you have obtained your PhD.

I

Mismatches and problems

Once we begin to see where the aims of the different groups involved with
the PhD are not congruent, it is not too big a step to realize that certain
conflicts are inherent in the system.
For example, where a student who wishes to develop an area of research
and make a significant contribution to it is paired with a leading supervisor who is more interested in speedy problem-solving, both of them will
inevitably feel frustrated. Diana in biochemistry started by looking for ‘the
truth’ and spending a lot of time working on important experiments even
though they would not form part of her thesis. At this stage Professor
Drake, whose concern was focused on findings, showed little interest and
tended to leave her alone for long periods. He became more interested in
her work when she began ‘churning out results’. Once this happened,
quite far into her registration period, she said: ‘My change of attitude
means that instead of experimenting for the sake of getting answers I’m
now experimenting in order to get graphs that can be published.’ This was
more satisfying for him but less satisfying for her.
By contrast, where a student is more interested in obtaining answers and
the leading supervisor wants to develop an area of research it will not be
long before they both feel irritated with the situation. Such was the case of
Freddy and Professor Forsdike:
I intend to tell the Prof. that he has to have very good justification for
my working after the 31st March. It has to be something vital and
important. All the poisoning work was never in the original project
outline and most of the additional experimental work he gives me is
quite irrelevant to my thesis.
Here the supervisor is encouraging the student to go beyond the boundaries of his thesis problem and pursue the leads that result from the original
experiments. The student, however, wants no more than to complete a
bounded series of experiments and write them up for a PhD.
If a supervisor is interested in discussing new ideas and exploring
untested areas but is responsible merely for ensuring that the student
completes a thesis of the required standard in a reasonable amount of
time, the work of supervision becomes less than satisfying. Mrs Briggs, a
supervisor in the Arts faculty of a university, was disenchanted with the
university’s perception of what a PhD means now compared to the more

THE NATURE OF THE PhD QUALIFICATION

I

31

relaxed and longer time scales before pressures for completion became the
norm, but she was very much enjoying supervising a postgraduate of
whom she said:
He’s always telling me things I don’t know and that’s exciting –
except, of course, I can’t know whether the things he’s telling me are
accurate. I try to make up to him for not being an ideal supervisor by
giving him enthusiasm. He knows I think that he’s interesting. I
don’t want to let him down – he’s such a very good research student.
I introduce him to others in the field who are experts, and then he
can approach them at any time he wishes for more specialist knowledge. He should finish the PhD in three years. He says it’s a life’s
work, and I agree that it could easily be, but the PhD is not a life’s
work and he must finish it quickly.
This supervisor is admitting that supervision can be of benefit to the
supervisor herself, and this is quite commonly the case. Indeed supervisors
can expect their students to be able to introduce them to new developments within the field of their thesis topic, and equally they must accept
that they are not the only source of academic knowledge and professional
skill for the student. Another benefit to supervisors nowadays is to have
the number of PhDs they have supervised to successful completion on
their CVs.
These cases show the kinds of juggling that have to occur between defining the boundaries of the research and managing the time available for
writing the thesis. Whether it is the student or the supervisor who takes
the major responsibility for this does not alter the fact that decisions
regarding what is appropriate, relevant and necessary have to be made
throughout the student’s period of registration.

I

Action summary

1

Set out to discover the standards and achievements for a fully professional researcher in your discipline that justify the award of the PhD
degree.
Read others’ PhD theses in your field and evaluate them for the
degree of originality in the research which has satisfied the
examiners.
Be aware that the initial enthusiasm for the research will inevitably
decline eventually. Provide the determination and application
(rather than brilliance) that are required to complete the work and
obtain the degree.
Use the full range of services that your university makes available to
ensure that you have proper support in your studies.

2

3

4

32

I

5

The tension between the boundaries of the research project and the
time available to complete it should be continually reviewed and
adjusted by the student and the supervisors.

HOW TO GET A PhD

I

4

I

HOW NOT TO GET A PhD
I

I

We want now to examine some very well-established ways of not getting a
PhD. These tried and tested ways of failing apply to all fields and have to
be pondered continually by research students. You have to be clear what
your position is on each of the seven ways of failing that we shall discuss if
you are not to fall into the traps they offer. As we shall see, just to have
them pointed out to you is not enough to avoid them. Most offer real
blandishments that have to be determinedly resisted.

I

Not wanting a PhD

The first method of not getting a PhD is not to want a PhD. This may seem
very strange, considering that a student is likely to be starving in a garret,
living on a studentship pittance, perhaps having given up a job in order to
study, or relying on the earnings of a spouse to put them through the
course. At the very least, you will be devoting a great deal of time and
effort and energy to research. Surely, you might say, considering what I am
giving up to the project, can there be any doubt that I really want a PhD?
Strangely enough, there can be. We think an analogy would help here. It
is the case, isn’t it, that none of us, research students and research supervisors, want to become millionaires? We should quite like it if someone
gave us a million pounds and we didn’t have to do anything for it, not
even buy a lottery ticket – that would sound like a good idea. But we don’t
want to set out to become millionaires. Obviously we don’t; otherwise we
wouldn’t be considering how to do research and get PhDs – we would be
considering how to build a better mousetrap, to invent an innovative

34

I

HOW TO GET A PhD

piece of computer software, to play the property market, to write bestselling novels . . . There are many ways of making a million pounds, but doing
a PhD is not likely to be one of them.
Exactly the same phenomenon occurs in regard to PhDs. People think it
would be a nice idea to do a PhD, they come with views of what they want
to do and then they turn round and say: ‘Please can I have a PhD for it?’
And the answer is often ‘No’. PhDs are given for a particular form and level
of research activity (which we shall discuss in Chapters 5 and 6) and if you
do not wish to carry out this work then you effectively do not want to do a
PhD. It is precisely the same distinction as that between hoping to become
a millionaire and setting out to make a million pounds.
Clearly the purpose of this book is to help you to set out to obtain a PhD,
and for this you need a degree of single-mindedness, a willingness to discover what is realistically required, and a determination to carry it out.
This is the sense in which you must want a PhD, and this ‘wanting’ is
important in that it has to work very hard for you. For example, it has to
carry you through occasions when what you are doing may seem very
pointless or fruitless, or when you ask yourself the question ‘Why have I
got myself into this?’ or ‘Why am I inflicting this on my family?’ You
cannot expect with an activity as demanding as doing a PhD that the
intrinsic satisfaction (such as the interest of doing the research, the
enjoyment of discussing your subject with other like-minded researchers)
will be sufficient on its own to carry you through. You must always have a
clear eye on the extrinsic satisfactions (your commitment to the whole
exercise of doing a PhD, its necessary place in your career progression, and
so on); you must want to do it.
There are, unfortunately, many who turn up as beginning PhD students
who do not want to do a PhD in this sense. Particularly vulnerable are
those who lack clear career goals and those who are using the PhD process
as a vehicle for a career change:
Jason was very intelligent and sailed through his undergraduate
degree course in biochemistry. He spent a good deal of his time on
student union affairs and was very involved in Green Party issues. In
spite of this, with intense revision in the two weeks before each year’s
exams, he got an upper second in his finals. He was delighted to be
offered a research studentship in the department, which allowed
him to research a topic in the chemistry of reduction of organic
residues. But he did not cut down on his outside commitments to
campaigning on green issues, seeing them as highly relevant to the
‘political’ aspects of his research. When he first presented useful ideas
that he might study, Dr Jacobs, his lead supervisor, was impressed
and she encouraged him to develop a research design. But it became
clear that he was more interested in sketching out the ideas than in

HOW NOT TO GET A PhD

I

35

buckling down to designing a viable research study and carrying it
out. When challenged, he always came up with a new and better
suggestion for the research and promised to develop it. He carried on
like this right until the end of his first year, when Dr Jacobs indicated
forcefully to him that she considered that he did not have any
chance at all of obtaining a PhD unless he gave up all his outside
activities and concentrated on his research work. Unless he did this,
she was not prepared to support the second year of his grant. Jason
was nonplussed by this ultimatum, as he had always considered
extracurricular activity to be an indispensable part of student life. At
this time he had the opportunity to work full-time for a period on a
Green political campaign, and he left the university to pursue this
activity.
Iris, a teacher for many years, developed an interest in a particular
specialism (multi-ethnic curriculum development) and thought she
would like to do research in order to establish herself in this new
subject. She found that doing research was taking her farther and
farther away from dealing with what she saw as the real issues of
pupils in the classroom in favour of a measurement-orientated form
of ‘science’ to which she was unsympathetic. She left and returned to
teaching.

I

Not understanding the nature of a PhD by overestimating what
is required

The words used to describe the outcome of a PhD project – ‘an original
contribution to knowledge’ – may sound rather grand, but we must
remember that, as we saw in Chapter 3, the work for the degree is essentially a research training process and the term ‘original contribution’ has
perforce to be interpreted quite narrowly. It does not mean an enormous
breakthrough that has the subject rocking on its foundations, and research
students who think that it does (even if only subconsciously or in a
half-formed way) will find the process pretty debilitating.
Of course, if you are capable of a major contribution then go ahead and
make it (there are still, for example, a few scientists who have an FRS but
not a PhD) – but this is a strategy for getting an honorary degree, not for
getting a PhD! For those not in that position – that is, most of us – an
original contribution can be rather limited in its scope and indeed should
be: apply this theory in a different setting, evaluate the effects of raising
the temperature, solve this puzzling oddity or review this little-known
historical event. In Chapter 6 we give a detailed discussion of the concept
of originality in relation to the PhD.

