Gina Wisker

The Good Supervisor
Supervising Postgraduate and
Undergraduate Research for Doctoral
Theses and Dissertations

Gina Wisker

The Good Supervisor
Supervising Postgraduate and
Undergraduate Research for Doctoral
Theses and Dissertations ·.

The Good Supervisor

Visit our free study skills resource at www.skills4study.com
Palgrave Study Guides
Authoring a PhD
Career Skills
Critical Thinking Skills
e-Learning Skills
Effective Communication for
Arts and Humanities Students
Effective Communication for
Science and Technology
The Exam Skills Handbook
The Foundations of Research
The Good Supervisor
How to Manage your Arts, Humanities and
Social Science Degree
How to Manage your Distance and
Open learning Course
How to Manage your Postgraduate Course
How to Manage your Science and
Technology Degree
How to Study Foreign languages
How to Write Better Essays
IT Skills for Successful Study
Making Sense of Statistics
The Milture Student's Guide to Writing
The Palgrave Student Planner

The Postgraduate Research Handbook
Presentation Skills for Students
The Principles of Writing in Psychology
Professional Writing
Research Using IT
Skills for Success
The Student life Handbook
The Student's Guide to Writing (2nd edn)
The Study Skills Handbook (2nd edn)
Study Skills for Speakers of English as
a Second Language
Studying the Built Environment
Studying Economics
Studying History (2nd edn)
Studying law
Studying Mathematics and its Applications
Studying Modern Drama (2nd edn)
Studying Physics
Studying Programming
Studying Psychology
Teaching Study Skills and Supporting learning
Work Placements - A Survival Guide for Students
Write it Right

Palgrave Study Guides: Literature
General Editors: john Peck and Martin Coyle

How to Begin Studying English Literature
How to Study Modern Poetry
(3rd edn)
How to Study a Novel (2nd edn)
How to Study a Jane Austen Novel (2nd edn) How to Study a Poet
How to Study a Charles Dickens Novel
How to Study a Rena issance Play
How to Study Chaucer (2nd edn)
How to Study Romantic Poetry (2nd edn)
How to Study an E. M. Forster Novel
How to Study a Shakespeare Play (2nd edn)
How to Study Television
How to Study James Joyce
Practical Criticism
How to Study Linguistics (2nd edn)

The Good
Supervisor
Supervising Postgraduate and
Undergraduate Research for Doctoral
Theses and Dissertations

Gina Wisker

C> Gina Wisker 2005
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this
publication may be made without written permission.
No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced. copied or transmitted
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. or under the terms of any licence
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency.
90 Tottenham Court Road. London W1T 4LP.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
The author has asserted her right to be identified as the author of this
work in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
First published 2005 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS and
175 Fifth Avenue. New York, N.Y. 10010
Companies and representatives throughout the world
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN is the global academic imprint of the Palgrave
Macmillan division of St. Martin's Press, LLC and of Palgrave Macmillan Ltd.
Macm illan® is a registered trademark in the United States, United Kingdom
and other countries. Palgrave is a registered trademark in the European
Union ;ind other countries.
ISBN-13: 978- 1- 4039-0395-2
ISBN-10: 1- 4039-0395- 6
This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully
managed and sustained forest sources.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Wisker. Gina, 1951The good supervisor: supervising postgraduate and undergraduate
research for doctoral theses and dissertations I Gina Wisker.
p. cm. - (Palgrave study guides)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-4039-0395-6
1. Graduate students - supervision of. 2. Faculty advisors.
3. Dissertations, Academic. 4. Doctor of philosophy degree. I. Title. II. Series.
LB2371.W57 2004
378.1 '94046-dc22

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
14 13 12 11 10 09 08 07
Printed and bound in China

2004051234

Contents

..

Acknow/edge1nents

I

Introduction

Stage 1
2
3
4

VII

First Stages of Research Supervision - Getting Started 13

Supervision Differences
Supervisors Studying: Development Programmes
Establishing and Maintaining Good Supervisory Practices

Stage 2

Establishing Research Processes and Practices

15
30

41
69

5

Defining Titles, Resc:arch Qut::stions, conceptual Frameworks
and Developing Proposals
6 Enabling Students to Carry Out a Successful Literature Review
and a Theoretical Perspectives Chapter
7 Methodology, Methods and Ethics
8 Supervisory Dialogues
9 Encouraging Good Writing

134

Stage 3

157

Working with Students - Issues for Supervisors

IO Helping Students to Help Themselves and Each Other
II
12
13

14
15
16

17

Dealing with Difference: working w ith Different Kinds of
Learners and Learning Styles
Supervising International Students
Study and Support at a Distance
Gender and Research Studies
A Little Too Close to Home: Supervising your Colleagues and/ or
Other Practice/ Professional-based Research
New Ways: Supervising Creative Research work and the PhD
by Publication
Maintaining Momentum

v

71
92
I 07
120

159
174
191
206

213
230

244
259

vi

Contents

Stage 4 Managing the Research Process to Completion
and Beyond

2 75

18
19
20
21
22

277
302
318
339
34 7

vVriling Up the Thesis or Dissertation
The Examination Process and Exan1 iners
Supporting Students towards a Successful PhD Viva
Supporting your Student post Viva/Exam

Life after Research

References

366

Index

383

Acknowledgements

This book has only been possible because of all the generous support, tolerance and sharing of my farnily, friends and colleagues. Thanks to Alistair,
Liarn and Kitt for putting up with the work schedule, Yehuda Ben-Simon,
Shosh Leshem. Gill Robinson, Miri Shacharn, Dan Shenkar, Avishai Tai,
Vernon Trafford, all our PhD candidates in the School of Education
International programme, and the English PhD students. Thanks also to
generous and thoughtful UK, Australian, New Zealand and University of West
Indies colleagues with whom I have worked in conferences, supervisory
development workshops and joint writing exercises. In particular, I would like
to thank Angela Brew, Margaret Cahill, Linda Conrad, Margaret Kiley, Eric
Meyer and Margot Pearson.
Thanks also to Ernrna Creighton. Jaki Lilly and Mark Warr1es for analysing
much of the underpinning research. Christine Beck, Michelle Bernard,
Lorraine Silk, Emma Warnes and Tess Youngs have helped me turn it into a
presentable shape while all my PhD, EdD, Masters and undergraduate
students have been the guinea-pigs and a great source of elements of practice.
Many thanks go to Maggi Savin Baden and anonymous reviewers for
reading and commenting on the text before final revisions.
Thanks fina lly to Suzannah Burywood and Anita Sethi at Palgrave
Macmillan for investing their critical patience in the project.

vii

1

Introduction

Rewarding, essential, potentially taken for granted and relatively under-theorised, research supervision plays a key role in higher education in empowering
students to become researchers. As both undergraduate and postgraduate
student numbers grow in universities, we are increasingly being invited to
supervise students' research projects, encouraging, supporting and enabling
them to develop skills, values and practices essential to learning the roles
and rules of research. Research is defined here as the crucial element of
learning - a fascination with questioning the world, ways of enquiring,
solving problems, creating and innovating and developing discourse, strategies and interpretations. In this dynamic context, there is a clear need for
sound, supportive and empowering supervision practices for students'
research study, whether for dissertation. project or thesis. This book bui lds
on shared experiences of good practice in research supervision at all levels
{see Delamont et al., 1998; Wisker and Sutcliffe, 1999; Wisker, Robinson and
Trafford, 2000, 200 I, 2003). and on research (e.g. Pearson. I 999; Brew. 200 I )
into what makes for effective supervisory practices.
The Good Supervisor intends to engage supervisors and students in a learning dialogue. It provides supervisors with research -informed suggestions
about the dimensions of supervisory practice. that is systems and practices
of working with conceptual frameworks, methods, processes of students'
research, issues and practices of personal effectiveness in this long-term ,
interpersonal interaction between supervisor and student. In its conception,
and through my own extensive personal and workshop interactions with
supervisors and those supporting the development of students and supervisors alike, it has been absolutely crucial that the book should provide opportunities to engage readers in dialogue between research and experience,
supervisor and supervisor, supervisor and student. This intends to be a
useful, non-patronising book. It could not succeed if it tried to talk down to
or 'train' supervisors. Instead, this book encourages reflection, dialogue and
an exchange of good practice. Development suggestions are built upon and
out of these practices. You are invited to engage with research evidencebased practice and reflective and evaluative stories from supervisors.
1

2

The Good Supervi sor

students and educational developers, in a dialogue w ith your own experience. In each chapter, discussions. suggestions and activities or tasks to
encourage refl ection and good practice are integrated with experience and
research.
Focusing on the role and support demanded of supervisors \.YOrking w i th
students, the book follows the shape of students' work. It considers how
supervisors can support and enable students in their research towards,
writing up and defence of dissertations, projects and theses at undergraduate
and postgraduate levels. Although primarily intended for supervisors, it
provides insights and task-oriented developrnental suggestions that
students could use on their own or in groups, with or w ithout supervision.
The book takes novice, intermediate and experienced supervisors alike
through the working life of supervisory relationships with research students.
It invites the reader to consider the academic and administrative elements of
enrolment and the development of a proposal. It deals with the development
of a clear conceptual framework; the choice of appropriate research methodologies; information searches and dialogues \.Yith authors and theorists in the
field; and the acquisition, management and analysis of information and
ideas. The book also considers organisation and how to tnaintain momentum; as well as v.;ays to ensure successful supervision and support for
students through to the later stages of writing up, subn1ission and, where
appropriate, taking part in a viva. The final chapter looks at what may lie
beyond completion of the research .
Issues of equal opportunities, includ ing gender, sexuality, ethn icity, culture,
power and authority, class, origin, learning style, language and tertiary literacy
inform the discussion throughout, in terms of choice of learning approaches,
access. study methods and supervisor- student interactions. Also considered
are the needs of international students. those studying at a distance or
'offshore', and candidates studying part-tin1e and/or in professional contexts.
The supervision of one's colleagues, students undertaking creative research
and the PhD by publication are also covered. Research and supervision
involve human interaction and, in this respect, the book invites you to work
with your student, considering both research ethics and interpersonal skills.
While those who are relatively new to supervision might And more of use
in Stages 1, 2 and 4 of the book, established supervisors might find stage 3
extends their thoughts and practices. There is something here for all of us,
throughout our supervising careers.
The Good Supervisor is unusual in that it is designed to support supervisors
of a variety of research students on a variety of research projects. Ho\.vever,
what the students all have in common is the research project. The book
intends to be:

Introduction

•

3

accessible for supervisors and for students; there are exercises and
discussions of good practice;

•
•

underpinned by research and by the scholarship of learning and teaching, much of my own work and work from the UK, USA and Australia;
pitched at undergraduate as well as postgraduate supervision. The scope
is different, the aulhorily/equalily relationships are different, the length
and depth of both the work produced and the time il lakes lo produce il
are different, bul otherwise many of lhe interactions and good practices
have much in comrnon.

The primary focus is supervising research projects in the social sciences,
humanities, performing arts, health and related areas, but there is also much
of relevance to colleagues supervising scientific research.
The idea for this book came about originally through reflecting on my own
practice as a student and as a supervisor, both at postgraduate and undergraduate level, and finding there was a dearth of literature and of guidance for
me in lhe supervisory role. This is nol unusual in educational development,
especially when a role, somewhat taken for granted and assumed to be an
everyday activity, suddenly takes centre stage. Postgraduate students have
been proportionally the greatest growth area in higher education in the UK.
USA, Europe and Australasia over the lasl ten years. and recent learning and
teaching agendas increasingly focus on the student as researcher. Research
into and support for the learning of undergraduate students in greater
numbers is well established (see Gibbs, 1991). Now the growth in the numbers
of postgraduates brings with it similar issues of student diversity. Suddenly,
during the 1990s, there were noticeably more women, more international and
more distance postgraduates. Additionally, whi le postgraduate full-time study
was con1mon among younger students in the sciences. where they were often
joining a research group, an increase v1as laking place amongst more mature
students, and in the social sciences, lhe arts and humanities. The rise of the
Educational and Professional Doctorates (EdD, PrD) began to take account of
differing needs, as did the gradual development of a Masters in Research
(MRes) and research elements in masters and undergraduate programmes,
albeit often only single sessions on dissertation planning prior to supervisions.
After the publication of the Dearing Report ( 1997). ongoing debates about the
importance of research as an essential learning activity have helped us to
concentrate on developing research methods and skills in all our students. In
the light of diversity, change and demand, supervisors and institutions need to
focus on supervisory developmental needs and practices.
The role has become visible, and it needs to be clarified and developed,
recognising differences from one subject to another. one institution to

4

The Good Supervisor

another, one supervisor to another. Initially, like other educational developers, I ran some supervisory development sessions in my own university to
bring together supervisors. to consider and share our own experiences of
good practice. I found that many who attended \.Vere already supervising
undergraduate projects and dissertations, and were hoping to supervise
postgraduates. Although n1any of us perform this role, there have been few
opportunities to reflect on, develop. or share good practice with others.
Supervisor development workshops ' took off'. I found that, nationally and
internationally, I was being asked to run sessions on supervising generally,
although specific topics were becon1ing more specialised: the supervision of
international, offshore and distance students; supervision in the creative and
performing arts; supervision in professional contexts and issues relating to
gender and diversity. Supervision is a dernanding and rewarding learning
and teaching experience that takes place within an international community
of academ ic practice. Reflecting on and sharing experience of evidencebased good practice strategies can benefit all of us - supervisors and
students. both postgraduate and undergraduate, at home and abroad.
In Austral ia and New Zealand, postgraduates now only attract funding if
they complete a directive. The supervisor has an important role to play here
(see Chapter 2). As our students increasingly push the boundaries of research
topics, practices and outcomes, we are invited to explore creative, supportive modes of developing supervision to guide and empower them. This book
does not pretend to dictate how to carry out the diverse and demanding
supervisory role, instead it builds on successful development sessions I have
been part of or have facilitated. Latterly, in researching and studying the role
further, particularly in relation to my work with colleagues on a successful
APU Israeli PhD programme, I have been made aware of the differing stories
we all have to tell of our supervisory experiences and journeys. Indeed, the
journeying model is one Australian colleagues have used extensively in
supervisor development programmes (see Chapter 2). Some have developed
online support, and Geof Hill, Tania Aspland, Coralie McCormack and
Barbara Pan1philon, among others, use storytelling and journeying. This for
me accords \.Vith the feminist and action research paradigms from which
much of my O\Nn work springs. I am grateful to them, and to others, particularly Delamont, Atkinson and Parry ( 1997). whose use of individual case
studies were the first I read dealing with supervisory role exploration. All of
these examples are at postgraduate level. A focus on postgraduate supervision, and the current emphasis on students as researchers (Alan Jenkins and
colleagues). enables us to share and explore the role and bui ld cornmunities
of good practice. This transfers into all our research supervision, whether it
be with postgraduates or undergraduates.

Introduction

5

In order to develop students as researchers. we need to help them focus on
asking research questions and exploring fields of study in critical, problemsolving, creative v.;ays, matching this with a dedication to organisation and
planning and achieving coherence and clarity of expression. Apart from
discipline differences, a number of generic issues impact on all students
undertaking research and success in these areas leads to a variety of postgraduate and undergraduate skills including. among others:
•
•
•
•
•
•

time management
problem-solving
conceptualisation
critical thinking
conceiving and actualising projects through to successful conclusions
writing for different audiences

If we consider the development needs of undergraduates and postgraduates,
we can begin to imagine some of the requirements of supervisors who work
with them , and so begin to devise supportive, developmental activities and
programmes. However, there are no fixed behaviours vvhich need to be
trained - instead the relationship between supervisor and student is more
like a dance, matching the steps of one to the other, and working together to
produce a research artwork of quality, creativity and substance.

~

Why are learning and research important?

Learning is essential for hu1nan growth. Research is the fundamental human
learning activity, involving enquiry, problem solving, diversity, flexibility and
decision -making. It encourages and enables the development of creative
thinking, problem-solving strategies and abilities which in turn help others to
approach everyday life as well as professional . political, local, national and
international questions and issues.
'Lifelong learning· (Reeve, Cartwright and Edwards, 2002), 'learning organisations', 'learning societies'. 'learning communities', 'communities of practice', even 'learning cities' are all current buzz words which suggest that
communities recognise and wish to promote continual learning, reflection.
awareness, problem-solving and improvement, and intelligent. creative
responses to the complexities of life and of knowledge generation .
Research as a form of learning is crucial in societies for energy, motivation. creativity, linking theory and practice, establishing informed habits and
ski lls for continuing to ask questions and seek information and answers, in

6

The Good Supervisor

con text. One anonymous reviewer shared a definition developed with other
Australian colleagues:
Research describes any critical and creative act1v1ty undertaken on a
systematic, disciplined basis and dedicated lo increasing knowledge. The
results of research therefore take many forms. Research can contribute to
knowledge directly through discoveries, or otherwise through innovative
ideas and techniques, conceptual refinernents, or constructive critiques
and s;mtheses which extend existing knowledge or its applications.
The defining characteristics of research include (i) a dependence on
fonnal, disciplined modes of inquiry. (ii) technical, conceptual or epistemological innovation, (iii) an open, rigorous approach to the testing of
results, and (iv) a commitment to publication in some form. Publication in
a general sense is the goal of a research enterprise, but the results of
research activity can be 'published' in many vvays, from a printed book or
article, an architectural design, a patent or a con1puter program, to a
creative composition or artefact in Lhe visual or performing arts which
adds to the body or range of knowledge or creativity. (Reviewer's
comn1ents)
Carrying out an important research project can provide us w ith an intellectual quality of life and an opportunity for e1notional growth and satisfaction.

~

Learning steps

A first piece of research is a major personal and learn ing achievement and
for many the dissertation is the key moment when they begin to appreciate
the stages, problems and potentially successful practices of research: from
interest, to enquiring, question-fonning, design of a study project, activating
a piece of research through the use of a conceptual framework, underpinning theories, methodologies and methods, handling and analysing data,
identi fying findings, managing and discussing their significance at factual
and conceptual levels and finishing a sound piece of research. Alongside
these, students learn, we hope, the human interaction skills of making the
most of their supervisor, of other institutional support, and that of family and
friends. An undergraduate dissertation is a relatively small and timebounded process and product when compared with a PhD, but in essence it
involves many of the same skills, cast of n1ind and hard \NOrk. When it is
undertaken, usually the final year of a student's degree, it is also usually the
longest and possibly, therefore, the most daunting piece of work so far. ln

Introduction

7

this it resembles a master's dissertation and a PhD, with changes in research
complexity and depth. Each is a learning step. a challenge. a development
moment. Completion will involve a student immersing themselves in and
making progress with the discourse and concepts of the subject and with the
discourse of research. It will enable them to begin to develop a dialogue in
their academic comrnun ity. Jn addition to subject-specific skills. generic.
transferable research method skills should be developed at both undergraduate and postgraduate stages. Many undergraduates may already have begun
to develop research for essays and projects. engaging with the academic
community through having new (enough) ideas and arguments. Many will
find they need supervisory guidance to identify subject-specific and research
skills and then to develop them. Students must be encouraged to reflect on
these skills. to recognise them. adapt and utilise them in the future.
As undergraduate dissertations are one of the first formal steps in
research, supervisors will probably need to structure and guide undergraduates rather more than postgraduates. For many academics. supervising an
undergraduate dissertation is the first experience of supervising student
research . Some may develop their own supervisory skills purely through
dissertation supervision, while others. may develop these skills in the capacity of management. mentoring or ~imilar roles. For some, the guiding of
research and the kind of interaction necessary could be a developmental
issue.
In discussing and sharing developmental ideas and practices in this book,
we will be drawing on supervisory expertise and research into supervisory
good practices at a// levels of the studen ts' and our own careers. In the main,
the focus is on postgraduate supervision because of the length of the supervisory relationship, the complex, conceptual level of the work involved and
because it is a developmental opportunity. Those undertaking undergraduate
supervision might well be thinking ahead to postgraduate supervision.
Differences which relate to the undergraduate and postgraduate levels - in
scope. time. autonomy, structure and guidance - will be indicated and
debated throughout, and if there are special issues related to undergraduate
supervision that arise in the focus of a particular chapter then they will be
highlighted .

.., The PhD as a learning step
The PhD is a major academic, professiorial and personal achievement. Upon
undertaking and then completing a PhD, a student will have made an original and valuable contribution to knowledge. Their work will be read by, built

8

The Good Supervisor

on and used by others - to build theory, to fuel change and encourage
good practice. The achievement of a PhD is also a beginning - the student
has made a major entrance into the academic community. By carrying
out research through the full cycle of planning, actioning, drawing conclusions and com1nunicating. they will have developed a range of valuable
skills.
Nor is the PhD an end in itself. The learning never stops. It is essential to
share \<\/Ork with others in the academic community and beyond. Here I am
talking about several kinds of sharing. First, vve have shares in others' work
- sharing and working with others as a learning community as they develop
their research pre- and post-doctorate. FollO\-ving the achievement of a
doctorate. students are involved in sharing and communicating, supporting
and enabling, building on each other's research and learning in learning
communities (Barnett, 2002). and contribuling towards enlightened learning
societies (Eagleton, 2000; Gibbons, Limoges and Nowotny cl al.. 1994;
Halpin, 2003). which make enlightened, creative decisions about fundamental human issues and practices (Squires, 1994; Rudd, 1985). This is essential
work. It is partly enabled through continuing Lo move forward in learning. It
is also enabled by transferring learning into professional and practical work
through disseminating and sharing with others in:
•
•
•

IJIJ..

conferences and symposia
publications
consultancies.

Continuing to research and continuing to develop
research ski ll s

It is important for students to build on the research they have carried out.
continuing to ask ne\.v questions, extending both old and new boundaries looking at those earlier designated areas 'for future research .. .' or considering where in their own thesis they imagine others taking their work further,
indicating 'other researchers might .. .'. For many, practical outcomes are a
1nain research aim so, following the achieve1nent of their PhD, they need to

put research \<\/Ork and its outcomes into practice, researching the effects.
Carrying out ne\.v research and developing further research skills are also
important next rnoves.
Renecting on and identifying the \<\/ea Ith of skills developed during research
is an irnportant activity both during and alter the research. This identification
contributes to performance development, personal self-esteem, confidence-

Introduction

9

building and effectiveness. Encouraging and supporting our students in these
developmental activities are also part of being a supervisor.

.,.. Content and sources of the book
This introduction establishes the importance of research as a knowledgebuilding, creating and sharing activity, identifying the key role the supervisor
plays in empowering and enabling students to engage successfully in
research. It introduces readers to the similarities and differences between
undergraduate and postgraduate research supervision, and to different
educational and staff development paradigms underlying the book as a
whole. The Good Supe1Visor utilises three kinds of sources and paradigms. It
draws from solid research-based evidence, as appropriate for a book dealing
with supervising research practices; and from a narrative paradigm. where
stories and interviews enact theories in practice for sharing and consideration to fuel development. And it uses the logically oriented 'good practice'
paradigm.
The book is structured to explore supervisory roles and practices in relation to the development of the student's research project, from identification
of a possible research area and question through to completion, submission
and, in the case of PhD students, the viva and beyond. Each chapter
combines systematically identified explorations and suggestions of good
practice arising from research and experience with the self-reflective
·community of practice' mode of sharing and developing your own, owned
response lo ideas and issues arising. Some researchers or supervisors might
be more comfortable with one mode of expression, others with another. The
idea is not to dictate but to engage in a dialogue, exploring suggestions that
have arisen from sharing experience, undertaking research, and through
face-to-face sessions with practitioners worldwide. From experiences of
supervision related to me by students, participants in postgraduate supervisory workshops, colleagues working with undergraduates and postgraduates
across a wide range of subject areas, and from my own experience as supervisor, educational developer and researcher, I have compiled extracts of
narratives, interviews and case studies of supervision in action. These repre sent some 'typical' or exemplary cases of supervisor and student experience
to illustrate issues and particular points. A number of issues are raised in
each chapter concerning challenges faced by students and supervisors alike
and how we as supervisors can enable and support students in making
choices which suit their research, empowering them to be successful
researchers.

10

The Good Supervisor

As a reader, you are invited to consider ways that m ight inform supervisory
practice. This active and reflective element is prompted throughout, but
particularly in a number of boxed tasks and activities. Some tasks and activities are less reflective and are intended to be used or adapted in your interaclions with students. Such involvement is designed to lead to owned
sel f-development as a supervisor.

..,.. Structure of the book

The book is divided into four parts. Its focus is on the work of the supervisor,
and development suggestions for that work are mapped onto stages of
students' research, completion and beyond.

Stage 1: First Stages of Research Supervision - Getting Started
This stage takes you, as supervisor. through the early stages of \.vorking with
students, contexts and subjects and of establishing and maintaining effective
\Vorking relationships. It considers programmes designed to support supervisors in their development of good practice.
Stage 2 : Establishing Research Processes and Practices
The second stage concentrates on the construction of the research, helping
students to develop \VOrkable research questions. conceptual frameworks,
literature reviews or theoretical perspectives. It discusses methodology and
methods and the design of the study and proposals as well as considering
research ethics.
Stage 3 : Working with Students - I ssues for Supervisors
The next stage turns to issues of interpersonal relations; overtime; considering roles and supervisory dialogue interactions; helping students to set up
support groups; dealing with differences, difficulties and practices related lo
gender, etc.; international students; and distance learning. It looks at the
variety of research, including relatively new forms - using creativity,
resea rch degrees by publication, and professional practice-based research. It
also looks at how, as supervisors, we can support students to get on with
their work and overcome difficulties, so maintaining momentum.
Stage 4: Managing the Research Process to Completion and
Beyond
The fourth stage looks at \.vriting up; preparing for the exarnination and
assumptions underlying examining; supporting your student's viva prepara-

Introduction

11

tion; carrying out any necessary post-viva work, and supporting them as they
head off into their academic lives - conference presentations; publications;
research; and recognising the skills they have developed .

.

..,. Structure of the chapters
Each chapter begins with a summary of areas to be covered, raises issues
and questions in task boxes, and pulls together good practice suggestions
from research, scholarship and experience for your consideration. The initial
focus in each chapter is on postgraduate research, although it is assumed
that the necessary stages of developing research are very similar in kind if
not in scope to those needed by undergraduates. Where they present as very
different from postgraduate supervisions, specific sections will look at
masters and at undergraduate supervision.
Several chapters contain practical or reflective activities/ tasks for students
to undertake as part of the process of being supervised and of carrying out
effective research. Each chapter ends with a summary of the main points
and, where appropriate, further reading.

The primary readership for this book is anyone who supervises undergraduate or postgraduate research projects and dissertations and theses, although
students will also find its ideas useful to them in their research. Based both
on research and experience, this book provides an essential, accessible, yet
scholarly guide for both new and experienced supervisors.

Stage 1
First Stages of Research
Supervision - Getting

Started

2 Supervision Differences

Jn addition to research evidence based information, this book uses the learn ing journeys and interviews of a range of students and supervisors. It is only
fa ir then that I should start with myself and my research as a learning
journey to begin debates about the different experiences of being supervised,
the postgraduate project, undergraduate study, and learning communities that is, fitting supervision into a broader context of support.
The chapter considers d iscipl inary differences, different supervision
models for different stages and current trends and tensions in research for
the PhD in particular.

This chapter considers:
• being supeNised 011d studying
• postgraduate and undergraduate supervision

• different forms ofsupervision for different learners in different
disciplines

"" My experience as a research student
Undertaking an MA and then a PhD \Vere two of the most important decisions I ever made . Achieving them both was amazing, giving me a real sense
of progressing in my own learning and boosting niy confidence. In addition,
although that is not why I undertook either of them, they have proved enormously useful professionally. My MA was part-tirne, Monday evenings, while
1taught at a local school and then at an FE college. It enabled my brain to get
into gear. Mine was an English MA ; we looked closely at poetry,
Shakespeare and modern fiction. There were only a few of us, so we all
discussed furiously. The tutor was one of the group. we made friends. When
the teaching stopped, we carried on learning, supported each other, met
15

16

The Good Supervisor

regularly, socialised, passed on references, looked at work-in-progress and
discussed critical issues touched on in seminars. Most of us were local, but
one person commuted for two hours each ...vay.
Then I undertook a PhD. This was a six-and-a-half-year venture, although
I certainly had not planned il lo be. To begin with, I experienced loneliness
and isolation. I had just a vague idea of an area I wanted to look al, no question. Thal emerged later on. I was in an individual learning relationship with
my supervisor. who was happy to talk about my \vork (sent in advance); on
one occasion for seven hours non-slop unlil the penny dropped - a fundamental theoretical and conceptual issue engaged in my mind with the actual
work I was doing - and I rnade a learning leap out of the fog of incomprehension . After that I \NOuld send chapters, drive the 120 miles to reach him,
talk for an hour about the work. and get on with it. There was no email and
I rarely phoned. The meetings were special and immensely supportive. When
I first started, rny supervisor sho\.ved me a w hole filing cabinet drawer of
students who had never completed. However, apart from archery, long
distance running was the only sport I ever even thought of doing reasonably
well and this was certainly a long haul. Thank you, Brian Lee (Nottingham
University). for sticking the course!
Another thing my supervisor did 1,vas to suggest that I was part of an academic community, so I went to conferences and contacted experts. One of
these experts lent me books and introduced me to his research group. Then I
had friends lo talk with about our \vriters. We punted, ate at each others'
houses, passed journal articles betvveen us and eventually, after job moves
and life changes, I finished (this is still a surprise!). My external examiner
was internationally renowned. He told me, via my supervisor, that I had
'passed' in advance of the viva. This was so liberating. fl was the equivalent
to being told, prior to my A levels, and as part of my interview, that I only
needed an 'E' lo get into university. Sornelhing critical that I've learned from
this is that taking the pressure off produces the best results with some tense
candidates. Thank you, Tony Tanner (King's College, Cambridge), my external examiner. we had a collegial. but nonetheless rigorous. hour and a half
of viva, which I actually enjoyed. 1IO\vever, one reviewer of this book
commented that this revela tion is expressly forbidden in some universities
and can be seen to encourage an 'old boys' club' attitude - inviting some
students in but making others undergo the strains of not knowing. Recent
experience as an examiner has suggested to me that while ·you've passed!'
reduces anxiety, it can also lead to unstructured, incoherent discussion and
some silences (e.g. candidate and examiner).
My own MA students are mostly local and have developed support groups.
My PhD students are a mixture, some locally based, one in Africa and several

Supervision Differences

17

in Israel. Some are studying English, some women 's studies, some learning and teaching - related areas.
Undertaking research means students are entering a dialogue with academic com munities in their subject, eventually contributing in the shape of
dissertations, theses and conference papers. Setting up academic communities of learning, locally or at a distance, via emai l, supports learning and
reduces isolation. Likeminded colleagues can act as a research group,
discussing issues and work-in-progress, contributing ideas, and enthusiasm
for reading and writing opportunities during and after the long slog that is
data collection, analysis and writing up (see Chapter 13) . Academics in the
same field might also be happy to discuss ideas, so putting students in touch
with them can help nurture dialogues and careers.

..,. The postgraduate project

Postgraduate work needs to be original in some respect, although it does
not have to be world shattering. Otten postgraduates imagine their MA,
MPhil or PhD is a huge and unmanageable piece of work. Wel l, it might
seem so at the start, but the main point is to see it as a 'doable' project,
recognise not only those gaps in their knowledge (to be addressed) but also
boundaries to the work. There will be variables the student will not address,
sub-questions others can ask, and, depending on the subject area, action
resulting from findings and evaluation that could lie beyond the frame of the
research. In the sciences, and some social and health sciences, it is not
unusual to have an experimental model where a problem, question or
hypothesis leads to experimentation, the design and testing of models,
producing results that feed into further \.vork beyond the scope of the thesis
or dissertation. In the arts and humanities, and again some social science
and health projects, there is exploration, problematising and questioning
areas of knowledge in writing, music, art, history, etc., to answer speci fic or
broader questions about values, representations and cultural contexts.
Models for change would usually lie elsewhere, beyond the research itsel f,
although in some research designs, models for change are the subjects of
the study.
Boundaries are important. Your student cannot research the whole field,
eve1ything about the subject, or all the questions that interest them, but
rigidity is also a problem. Planning a piece of work which has a rigid design,
with questions to which the student already knows the answers, will probably not result in a masters dissertation of real quality and certainly will not
produce a PhD. Research should be planned, but should also throw up some

18

The Good Supervisor

surprises, extending thoughts in the field in critica l ways. All research, and
particularly postgraduate research, needs to engage with previous work in a
dialogue, so lhal whi le it might star t w ith a literature review, this should not
be a dead list of sum1narised reading, but should comprise a dialogue
between experts' and the candidate's own research. Undergraduate research
also needs to be original in its contribution, insofar as students make their
O\.Yn synthesis of existing research and carry out their own fieldwork, experiment and analysis. The best undergraduate research is very original, and
creates a good basis for further research. With increases in sludent numbers,
the length and frequency of undergraduate written work throughout the
course has tended to be reduced, making the research project or dissertation
into a daunting learn ing and writing task. However, there are other opportunities for students to develop research skills in, for example. independent
learning modules if these focus on research skills. Indeed, students should be
encouraged to start developing sound research skills for their early essays as
these will stand them in good stead when a long and deep project or dissertation must be tackled.

~

Developing and enabling supervisory relationships

Students need to be able Lo engage with and work with their supervisors
(often very busy people, who nevertheless benefit from development, experience and the sharing of good supervisory practices). Working in a research
dialogue w ith a student focusing on areas of n1utual interest, is a most
reward ing interchange, but it is also a job which, like a concertina, seems to
expand. Supervisors can worry that they have not been in touch v.iith
students enough, or that they are doing too much of the work - translating
ideas into research activities. suggesting reading and clarifying. Students in
research methods development sessions often laugh at the idea that supervisors could do too rnuch, but it is necessary to guide students into autonomy
and away from dependence. The supervisory relationsh ip varies with
subjects, cultural expectations. learning di fferences, gender, distance and
whether the student is part-time or full -time. Full-time students engaging in
scientific research alongside their research group and supervisor might meet
regularly for small amounts of supervisor input, a masterclass, monitoring
and directive, but then they could find that they are not sure which parts are
their own work, which decisions they have made and what is rnore properly
the work of the group and supervisor. These are issues of ownership that
must be sorted out early on, so students can identify their own research
progress and achieve their outcomes.

Supervision Differences

19

Many research students work in relative isolation, especially in the arts
and humanities. Perhaps this avoids the group ownership problem, but there
are benefits to be gained from developmental dialogue with an academic
community of practice which both supports research and helps the development and clarification of complex conceptual ideas through the opportunities it offers for arliculation and debate.
My distance students tend to send me 40-50 pages of revised chapters and
expect immediate responses. Sometimes their English creates a stumbling
block to understanding their argument. Students can phone at awkward
moments with serious concerns, then 'disappear' for months on end, unresponsive to pro1nptings by mail or email. Students working at a distance,
studying part-time and those whose learning culture background differs from
that of their supervisor or \A/hose English does not allow them to express all
their thoughts clearly are in a very different position to those whom we meet
regularly. My Master's students and I enjoy a study weekend away at the
seaside. Apart from sharing each other's \Nork and getting to know each
other. there is ample opportunity to ask questions about their research and
share research developments. None of this is on offer to students studying
overseas. Clarity of mutual expectations. ground rules about regularity, the
type and focus of supervisions and agenda setting are all essential in a good
supervisor/student relationship. So. too, is the involvement of the student in
a supportive academic community. This is true of all disciplines, all levels, all
geographical areas.

... Quality time

Students require specifically focused moments to concentrate on the development of their individual projects. Casual regular meetings or group activities are not focused enough on the individual. For those studying part-time
and/or at a distance, regular contact times should be arranged. Supervisors
could ask students to send email drafts of work and comment on these in a
regular online office hour, send ing back annotations and following this up if
necessary with phone calls w hen tricky conceptual moments or learning
leaps arise. For supervisors w ith postgraduates from different cultures, it is
important that both halves of this relationship work in the context of some
understanding of each other's cultures, expectations and learning backgrounds (see Chapter 12).
Supervising at a distance is a difficult skill to learn. It is preferable to meet:
(I) at the beginning to clarify working arrangements and directions of the
research; (2) in the middle to maintain rnornentum; and (3) at the end of a

20

The Good Supervisor

large research piece such as a 1nasters o r PhD. As they complete, students
need support in expressing the coherence of their work; ensuring the
conceptual framework is clear and that theori sing underpins their work; and
that theories. arguments and findings weave throughout the research as a
whole and are finally pulled together in conceptual findings and a conclusion. Students often need guidance to ensure there are clear links between
chapters and good signposting throughout so that the completed dissertation
or thesis e1nerges as a cohesive, well-focused contribution to debates in the
field .

.,. Undergraduate study and supervision

For some reason that I no longer remember, I did not do a dissertation as an
undergraduate, so the shock of planning, undertaking and \.Yriting a long
study at masters level was considerable. Some academics would like to
remove the dissertation from undergraduate courses, arguing that it carries
too much weight in a degree. As someone who was not required to produce
one, I disagree tota lly. A dissertation offers students the chance to undertake a piece of research in an area of interest to the1n and to pursue it
through to completion. Undergraduates present with broad areas of interest
just like PhD students. Our work together is to define a research question,
provide a workable title. be exploratory and problematising, but also
specific, enabling them to avoid trying to cover too much ground, too many
texts, too many questions Undergraduates are not expected to carry out
quite the original, creative, problem-solving work that is expected of a PhD
candidate, or at least not to the sa1ne extent. Their project is much shorter in effect, much more like the kind of research project you meet in a job,
during your professional life, something manageable of approximately 7000
words, with the right kind of scholarly apparatus (abstract, references, etc.)
and research approach. However, now that many students are on modular
courses writing on ly 1500-2000-word essays, a dissertation feels like a large
task. It is so much more than the sum of its parts, which themselves could
be described as four or five short essays (to let it seem manageable in terms
of length). Actually, the dissertation is a conceptualised, w ell-argued, holistic product with theories, references and themes running fron1 the opening
pages through to the final and conceptual conclusions. An undergraduate
dissertation is a first step in research, demanding the development of
research ski lls. A postgraduate dissertation or thesis is a similar product and
process, but is much longer, deeper, rnore original and more conceptually
complex.

Supervision Differences

21

.,.. Making it real

Students need regular supervision to define their research project and undergraduates might need a much tighter rein than a PhD student. It is a shorter
project in terms of ti1ne as well as length, with none of the potential elasticity of completion time accorded to postgraduate study (although this is
increasingly less true as completion becomes an institutionalised objective).
Undergraduate dissertations have to be carried out in less than a year, which
means they must be well-planned, achievable and capable of being
completed quickly.
Undergraduates learn to define a realisable project for their research, to
plan the timeline and to select and defend methodology and methods. They
select sarnples and develop a research design, and learn the art of data
analysis and of keeping good referencing records. They also learn presentation skills, if presenting to peers, and writing skills, such as good expression
and coherence between abstract, introduction, chapters and conclusion. All
of this will contribute towards ensuring an organised piece of work and
establish good working practices for longer projects later. Many will produce
work which is not staggeringly original, but it:
•

•
•

should contain originality, whether this is a combination of arguments
against which is set the student's own argument and discussions; a new
combination of areas; or a focus which is explored in depth;
will avoid plagiarism, using the work of theorists and critics in a dialogue
with the student's own arguments and findings;
rnust contain:
(I) an argument, not just a survey
(2) good referencing
(3) development of methods in action
(4) evidence of working at a conceptual level - making meaning
(5) recognition of significance, and argument and ideas.

Supervising students carrying out research for postgraduate and undergraduate dissertations or theses is probably the most rewarding teaching we can
do. At least I have found it so and have met colleagues who agree, both
locally and internationally, in everyday practice, at educational development
sessions, and especially in relation to the large cohort-based international
PhD programme on which I have worked since its inception in 1997. My
colleagues, the programme director Dr Gillian Robinson, co-tutor Prof.
Vernon Trafford and latterly three of 'our' post-doctoral colleagues, Dr Shosh
Leshem, Or l\~iri Shacham and Dr Yehuda Ben Simon, have all contributed to

22

The Good Supervisor

the learning conversations about supervisory practices, and the learning
conversations that forn1 supervisions for us. It is colleagues al workshops
and students at PhD, PrD, EDD, Master's and undergraduate levels who have
produced some of the suggestions about supervisory practices that form the
bulk of this book. lt is a truisn1, of course, that v-.re learn from our students,
but nonetheless true for all that! And hO\.Y, we might ask, can undergraduate
and postgraduate supervisors be rolled together in this way? One of the
distinct differences is that of the sca le of supervision or the scope of the
project.

~ The role

The supervision role is n1uch more clearly defined as a professional relationship than that of tutor, friend or colleague and it relies on more than goodwill and spare time. It needs to be, and in 1nany cases is, the focus for
developrnent and 'training', allhough I don't like the n1echanistic overtones
of that tenn. Students at all levels need guidance, modelling and managing
so that they can start to develop as independent researchers. This seems to
require a rnixture of the specialised, developed skills discussed above developing reliable research questions, conceptual frarneworks, methods
and analytical skills and tools to enable the research to come to organised
fruition - and people skills. we wi ll consider here generic research supervision at undergraduate and postgraduate levels, using postgraduate practices
and perspectives as fundamental underpinning models as well as interpersonal skills. Colleagues I have discussed supervision \Nith confirm my own
sense that \A.re are alvvays expected to 'tuck' supervision in, lacking focus on
the very systems and practices of teaching and guidance it requires.
Currently, increasingly driven by governrnent objectives and quality assurance demands, the role needs to be clarified and supported by expl icit development, recognition and reward. This is particularly so in Australasia where
postgraduate supervisory practice development is now increasingly compulsory, possibly because funding is attached to postgraduate co1npletion
(students are funded from the outset, but their completion feeds into funding
a formula for future students, each completion being worth approximately 50
per cent for a new student). Supervisory development enables us to discuss
and adopt good practices \Ne share and develop in such contexts (and the
horror stories fron1 which we have learned). These feed into all our supervisory work, at every level. We can also now benefit frorn a growing research
base. The next sections look at research into supervisory practices, models,
and at supervisor development programmes.

Supervision Differences

23

.,.. Tensions and developments in postgraduate
research and its supervision
At the start of a doctoral supervision I make a point of underlining the
possibility of failure. It has to be c1ystal-clear that enrolling, even as a
well-qualified student with a good Master's degree, as a doctoral candidate has no implications for success either with the thesis or on the job
n1arket. Hard facts, but honest ones. By definition, there can be no guarantees that a project will produce an original contribution to knovvledge.
society needs a contingent of people who have understood that ideas
cannot be bought, and who resist the creeping managerialism besetting
intellectual inquiry. Putting 'pure research' (the quest for knowledge) first
is not the product of an ivory tower; it is deeply political. If we are to be
defined only in terms of the needs of one profession, how can change
occur? How will old injustices and prejudices be overcome? Great
research is original, challenging, and the product of minds able to see
beyond narrovv, pre-set goals. The current trend towards managing
research (in theo1y, only its infrastructure and resources) has already led
to a preference in the funding bodies for neat, well-planned projects,
commercially contracted in advance, as opposed to 'blue skies' research.
(Newman. 200 l , p. 16)
Newman's comments on the dangers, tensions and social context for
research students in English spell out issues for all disciplines. A manageable
piece of research might be produced at the expense of real creativity and
contribution to knowledge. Students can fail. Debates about supervisory
practices and their development are located right at the centre of such
tensions.
Key issues when we consider research supervision are the nature of the
research process, the aims and scope of the research itself, and the student's
own self-development. Here a major tension emerges between the managed
and manageable piece of research and the creativity, arguing and space to
make mistakes and learning leaps that the research experience offers.
Leonard (2001, p. 39) acknowledges the tensions between the usefulness
of postgraduate training courses, JCT to aid doctoral learning and supervision, and the current over-bureaucratisation of the supervision process - a
possible problem for developing a creative atmosphere. Of importance here
is the argument that the culture of emphasising co1npletion could lose us the
exploration, creativity, problem-solving and sheer originality of research,
especially at PhD level.
In the UK, the ESRC's pressures to complete match those in Australia and
New Zealand to link funding to completion: 'a powerful mechanism for

24

The Good Supervisor

research steerage' (Ozga, I 998). This could lead to a different kind of thesis
at PhD level, one which could be more time-managed, feasible, boundaried,
planned and achieved - but alternatively could be less creative, less involved
in r isk-taking or originality.
The PhD thesis used to be conceived as a major piece of work on which
authors could draw for their first n1onograph and several important articles. Increasingly, however, even in the humanities (where the AHRB has
still not made a requirement for taught courses) all doctorates are becoming 'Kentucky fast research'. That is to say. they 'should' all now be
pitched at a 'manageable level' , \Nith the capacity to succeed under pressure, and time 1nanagement, of paramount irnportance - rather than a
PhD at least tackling an issue of irnportance to the discipline and the individual student, hovvever long it takes. In the natural sciences, more original work has always waited till postdoctoral level. but research here has
been steered towards 'more boring but patentable paths'. (Power, I 997.
p. I 00)
The conveyer belt version could threaten creativity. Students are now being
m ore explicitly encouraged to see even the PhD as an opportunity to develop
a w ide variety of research skills for future use in researching and other areas
of professional practice. Vital elements are:
learning to exercise disciplinary judgement. that is to say acquiring the
academic equivalent of 'good taste': knovving \.vhen an experiment has
·worked', how best to gain access to a research site, hO\¥ to evaluate
sources, how best to choose theories and critical cases, what there is to be
seen in the data, when a reading is plausible and an analysis correct, how
to construct an argument, and how to write and present a good paper.
(Leonard, 200 I, p. 4 I)
Supervisors play a key role here - model ling, advising and supervision are
part of our own development process:
Ne\.vcomers need neither to be left lo reinven t the wheel nor to have
didactic teaching. Rather they need a practicum . with supervisors who can
demonstrate, advise, observe performance. detect errors of application
and point out correct responses. This is the induction \.Vhich students find
exciting and the reason \·vhy they subrnit to many years of (often unpaid)
work. It is also vvhy it is essential for acadernics to combine teaching and
research - not to acquire a knowledge base, but to have a feel for the
process of construction of disciplinary knowledge. (Leonard, 200 I , p. 42)

Supervision Differences

25

Cramming the PhD into only two or three years of work could result in the
loss of a creative element. Leonard and others suggest that important postgraduate research skills could be learned either in a period as a postdoctoral
student, as in the sciences, or in an initial period of employment before
'tenure· is granted, as in the American system. Alternatively, the widespread
development of the Master's in research could enable students to learn skills
before embarking on a PhD. Some supervisors of research argue that instead
of enhancing research, the focus on skills could result in a decline in
research standards.
People undertake research for a variety of reasons. For many undergraduates it is a compulsory part of their degrees; for some postgraduates it is an
opportunity to engage in work that informs their professional practice. For
many, this is not mutually exclusive - it is a chance for personal growth and
intellectual development.
So why is research worth the effort? Undertaking research in any subject
consists of problematising whatever is given, putting enquiry into action and
learning hO\.v to develop an evidence base for knowledge claims and contributions. Research is U1e essential learning process, cast of mind and set of
skills.

..,. Different sorts of supervision for different
disciplines and learners

Supervising research demands that we too, as supervisors, develop a range
of research related and interpersonal skil ls: we must align our practices and
learning behaviours with those of our students, nurture, prod, push, support.
encourage, insist and guide them, and then encourage independence. It's a
tough job, but endlessly rewarding.
Delamont et al. (l 997) note that all supervision is a self-conscious rather
than intuitive activity: 'good, pleasurable supervision is based on selfconsciousness, not intuition or nying by the seat of your pants' (p. I).
Supervising is partly a set of skills that can be learned and improved with
practice. Like other studies suggesting good supervisory practice, the
Delamont et al. study arises from research, the earliest example of which was
the Spencer Foundation's 1987 three-year research programme in five countries (Clark, 1993). In taking into account the effects of mass higher education, the labour market demand for advanced education, knowledge
expansion and an increased government role in the patronage and supervision of research, Clark { 1993) discovered greater similarities within than
betv.1een disciplines in terms of supervisors' needs, despite national differ-

26

The Good Supervisor

ences. In effect, Japanese historians had more in common with the ways
other historians went about their research than they did with Japanese biologists, for instance.
Clark argued 'the future of British acadernic science is quite problematic'
( 1993, p. 369), because the 'tension between university and state is great' (p.
369). Becher Cl al. ( 1994), contributing to a book on global aspects of
research in graduate education (Clark, 1993). went on to publish the British
chapter as a separate monograph. Following concern about poor completion
rates (Blume, 1986, pp. 217- 22), the British ESRC launched a research initiative on the social science PhD (Burgess, 1994). Two ESRC-funded projects on
science PhD students and their supervisors followed, so that by 1995, the UK
had developed a substantial body of data on doctoral study.
•
International comparisons reveal differences in postgraduate education:
France has the CNRS system, as well as the 1984 reform of the doctoral
degrees, \Vhich led to the single doctorate followed by the habililalion. The
USA has the largest and most diverse system. (Delamont c l al.. 1997,
pp. 8-9)
However, the overwhelming effects of supervisory cultures and provision for
research are more significant than national differences.
The supervisory cultures and the existence or absence of a laboratory
setting for research are rnore important for the life of the individual
student than the particular nation state, despite Traweek's findings on
physics. (Traweek 1988, in Delamont cl al., 1997, p. 9)
Different disciplines niight demand different kinds of research paradigms
and behaviours (Conrad, 1999). Parry et al. (1992) note that anthropology
students require immersion in the field, while Gumpert (1993) and Becher
(I 993) indicate that historians are expected to be independent practitioners,
in contrast with students in the physical sciences. Acker, Hills and Black
(1994) use interviews with supervisors and students to define strategies and
styles of supervision contributing towards students' successful research
practices and cornpletion in relation to disciplina1y differences, considering
different stages of supervisions and matching different stages of the
students' work. Acker el al. ( 1994) con1ment on the social sciences alone,
considering two subjects, education and psychology, in three different
universities, which conceptualise knowledge and v1Jays of undertaking
research in their fields in ralher differenl ways. They also suggest two modes
of supervision: 'The technical rationality model gives priority to issues of

Supervision Differences

27

procedure or technique, while the negotiated order model conceptualizes
supervision as a process open to negotiation and change' (Acker et al., 1994,
p. 483) . These are based on contrasting beliefs about learning and the
student /supervisor relationship. Of the 'techn ical ration ality' model they say:
The PhD can be either a training exercise or an original contribution to
scholarship; the student an apprentice to a faculty member or an independent scholar; the goal scholarly crea tivity or speedy completion. The
discussion to follow considers another such tension. (Acker et al., 1994,
p. 484)
In contrast to the 'technical rationality' model:
The negotiated order model, alternatively, derives from the interpretive or
interactionist approach to organizational cultures and the student career
in higher. usually professional, education (Becker, 1970; Oleson and
Whittaker, 1968; Strauss and Corbin. 1985; Woods, 1990). Actions of
students and supervisors are based on perspectives derived from their
past and present experiences. interactions with others, and interpretations
of situations. Situations are characteri zed by uncertainty, uniqueness and
value connict (Schon. 1987, p . 6) making the application of technical rational solutions unrealistic. Mutual expectations between supervisors and
students are subject to negotiation and change over time. The student,
like the supervisor, participates fully in negotiating and interpreting meanings. (Acker et al.. 1994, p. 485)
Built on emotional intelligence, differing from more didactic, scientific,
established rnethods, the model is rnore natural Lo and possibly best suited to
professional interactions possible wi th students w ho are career professionals
themselves or likely to move into professional roles.
Acker et al. ( 1994) scrutinised 67 students' transcripts, 56 supervisors and
14 other rel ated persons such as administrators. tutors in charge of research,
heads of departments and secretaries. They found differences of opinion and
exper iences with regards to stock elements of supervision ranging from: (I)
tutorials where agendas were seen as set by students or supervisors or as
negotiated; and (2) work consisting of reporting or guiding or nurturing.
Several students found it difficult to take responsibility in tutor ials. There
was enough agreement as to the conduct of a good tutorial to provide acadernic guidance on running one.
Different supervisors had style preferences. Some were directive and taskoriented; some seem ed too busy to give the time to the students. Supervisors
saw students as differing in the amount and kind of direction and supervi-

28

The Good Supervisor

sion they needed, some modifying practices aller the ESRC's directive on
completion .
Dimensions of the relationships between supervisor and learner w ere also
discussed. Some supervisors preferred to be close, inviting their student to
dinner, having international students to stay for Christmas, for instance;
while others retained a distance. Students responded to differences in supervisors by adapting their O\vn styles (although some could not):
Several students indicated that infrequent supervision had taught them
ho1;v to be assertive, perhaps seeking help elsewhere, or to be better
organised. Some thought that their supervisor had intended this outcome.
(Acker et al., 1994. p. 494)
One major problematic issue indicated in the study is that supervisors who
are pressed for completion rates move towards the 'technical rationality' and
directive rnodels while rnost have been seen to prefer lo work in the 'negotiated order' model, and indeed this latter model seems to better fit the
demands of a broad range of supervisors and students.
Kiely ( 1982) and Bargar and Duncan ( 1982) argue that supervision should
be devoted to the fostering of student creativity. Doctoral research should be
a 'lived, integrated experience of creative problem-solving' {Kiely, 1982, p. 5).
The supervisor's task becon1es o ne of facilitating rather than directing.
Blanton ( 1983) terms this 'midwifing the dissertation'.
Burgess et al. ( 1993) suggest that the business studies supervisor was likely
to start out as 'project manager' and end up as a 'critical friend'. Some
researchers indicate that more 'direct' supervisions get good results, while
others prefer negotiation. Culture, discipline, study stage and personality
probably pl ay equal parts in this. Wright and Lodwick ( 1989) use factor
analysis for interviews with 43 supervisors to identify six styles of supervi sion, finding that supervisors who were 'outstanding' in terms of completion
rates used ' intellectually nurturing' and ·nexible' styles - negotiated, nexible
styles n1oving between the directive and the nurturing at different times have
more likelihood of enabling students lo work towards completion. Certainly
this claim fits in with the supervision paradigms which I and colleagues
(Wisker, Robinson and Trafford, 2003) have discovered in our own work with
cohorts of Israeli PhD students. Whether supervisors are acting as midwives,
critical and creative friends, rnanagers or directors will affect the differing
work responses of students, but so too will the students' kinds of research.
Recent studies (Brew and Peseta, 2004) identify a range of styles accompanying different stages in the student's work as much as differences in
disciplines.

Supervision Differences

29

Delamont et al. ( 1997) highlight clashes:

2

students needing more carefully organised direction when a supervisor
has a more casual approach
supervisors feeling that students need their hands holding while they
should be encouraging independent thought.

Apprenticeship models, more common in the sciences. probably encourage
less initial autono1ny or authority questioning in the student. It could be
argued that some international students, for instance, expecting the apprenticeship model and finding a 'negotiated order' model would need careful
induction into the very different kinds of expectations and interactions it
encourages.
Along this continuum there are many potentially successful matches and
an equally large potential for misrnatch. IL is the mismatches that result in
unhappy students and non-cornpleted work.
We will return later (in Chapter 8) to consider supervisory roles and supervisory dialogues. Both research and supervision are becoming more professionalised in practice. As students are increasingly expected to undertake
research training and developrnent (see Chapter 3), it is not surprising that
universities expect supervisors to engage with support and development
programmes, and to become more renective and professional in their roles.
Increased research student numbers and national pressure to improve
completion rates have all contributed towards the innovation and enhancernent of supervisor development programmes. The next chapter explores
and discusses some of these programmes with a specific emphasis on
programmes in Australia and the UK, and on my own supervisor development workshops .

.,.. Further Reading

Acker, S., Hills, T. and Black, E. ( 1994) 'Thesis superv1s1on in the social
sciences: managed or negotiated?', 1-Jigher Education, 28, 483- 98.
Delamont, S., Atkinson, P. and Parry, 0. (1997) Supervising the PhD: A Guide to
Success (Buckingham: Open University Press).
Leonard, O. (200 1) A Women's Guide to Doctoral Studies (Buckingham: Open
University Press) .
Newrnan, J. (2001) 'The shape of graduate studies in English'. Issues in English:
Doctor' Doctor! Doctoral Studies in English in Twenty-first Century Britain, I
pp. 15- 24.

3

Supervisors Studying:
Development
Programmes

The policy in Australasia is for postgraduates to be funded upon completion
rather than registration of their studies. In the UK, recent publications (e.g.
the Metcalfe report, Metcalfe et al., 2002), have shifted attention to the need
for development programmes or opportunities for supervisors to support
thern in focusing on irnproving research supervision so that research
students can benefit and, hopefully, complete in greater numbers.

This chapter considers:
• supervisor development programmes - workshops and online

Metcalfe et al. (2002) identify the proportion of UK universities training and
developing supervisors, insisting on the improvement of the extent of provision, v;hile recognising institutional differences:
Training should be specified by the institution and compulsory for [ncw1
supervi sors. !\II supervisors, whatever their level of experience should
have regular training.
57% require training of new supervisors
24% require training for all supervisors
Specify the rncans by \vhich a supervisor can seek independent advice on
supervisory issues, especially if they have concerns about a student's
ability or application to the study progran1me. (Metcal fe et al., 2002, p.
46)
As professionals, supervisors can benefit from development models enabling
30

Supervisors Studying: Development Programmes

31

the sharing of good practice. Workshops, accredited programmes. online
supporl and opportunities to enhance practice using narratives are the
models favoured by UK, Australasian and other colleagues. we will explore
examples of each.
I have run a number of traditional workshops on postgraduate supervision
(see the boxed example of a three-day programme, held at the University of
the west Indies in 2003 and 2004). At such workshops, colleagues from a
variely of disciplines, some very experienced, some relatively new to supervision. work together Lo explore case studies, exchange good practice. and
consider ways to enhance their own supervisory practice. I wish to thankthem and workshop colleagues from other universities for insights.

Progra m me Example

PhD Supervis ion: A Supervisor Development workshop
Professor Gina Wisker PhD

Day 1
Establishing good supervisory practices for a successful PhD
Welcome and introductions

Outcomes for the workshop
I.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Deciding who to supervise; what to supervise; and being
supported in your supervisory development
Establishing and maintaining good supervisory practices
Starting to supervise - defining titles, developing proposals, the
importance of the conceptual framework
Concepts of research : an introduction to choosing research
methodologies and methods
Supervisory roles and dialogues - empowerment? challenge?

Day2
Maintaining momentum and successful learning/ supervisory practices
I.

Dealing with difference; working with different learners and learning styles

32

The Good Supervisor

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Developing critical thinking and good writing habits
Gender and other differences in the supervisory relationship
Supervising cross culturally, at a distance and offshore
Helping students to help themselves and each other
Writing transfer and progress documents
Day 3

Completing and achieving the PhD

2.
3.
4.

Dealing with difficulties: (I) in the research and development of
the dissertation. project or thesis
Dealing with difficulties: (2) in the supervisory relationship
Writing up and submitting
Getting ready for the viva. mock vivas. the viva process

5.

During and afterwards

I.

l?cview and close

Models of supervisory development programmes range from training and
instructional to narrative storytelling and sharing (McCormack and
Pamphilon. 2004). Some programmes are workshop-orientated, some
online, and some are mixed mode (Wisker. Robinson and Trafford, 2003) .
Those using renective practice and online case studies exist at both
Queensland Uni versity of Technology (Aspland et al.. 2002) and the
Un iversity of Sydney, where, in the light of the new research training agenda
in Australia, Angela Brew and Tai Peseta (2004) run a research supervision
development programme, the ' Recognition Module', inviting research supervisors to produce an online case study of their own supervisory practice for
supervisory development.
Since 1993. approximately 400 supervisors have had some relationship to
the University of Sydney Recognition Module, which provides an opportunity
for colleagues involved in research supervision to draw together their work.
building on workshops, and utilising scholarly reading on research supervision. The developn1ent of an informed case study moves supervisors on frorn
their own established practice, oll:en modelled on how they were supervised,
encouraging awareness of this and how they incorporate research information on good practice. Case studies show reflection and development. The
tutor team provide feedback and the case goes online as a resource.
Participants are invited to focus on the stages of research development,
differences in learning, culture, distance, gender and subject area, and differ-

Supervisors Studying: Development Programmes

33

ent research paradigms within which students are working, whether they are
undertaking research related to professional practice or more thematically
based disciplinary or interdisciplinary research.
Case studies depict incidents of teaching and learning and raise pedagogical issues and prompt discussion of them (Hutchings, 1991. p. I).
Renective practice is enhanced if a case study contains four dimensions.
1
2
3

4

Authentic - the issue must be anchored in real-life experience.
Concrete detail - sufficiently rich in context so readers can make decisions about how to proceed.
Cases are most effective when written in narrative form - so the reader

identifies with the issues and characters, and has some emotional
investment in how the action unfolds.
Open-ended - 'open to various interpretations and not suggestive of a
particular or correct course of action'. (Brew and Peseta, 2004, p. 9)

Brew and Peseta (2004), McCormack and Pamphilon (2002), Aspland et al.
{2002) and Delamont et al. {1997) all use case studies. Examples include
extracts from narratives, interviews and short real life case studies for
consideration. These help to develop and share ideas on good practice in
supervision.
Writing case studies as a form of scholarly and professional development
within the context we have outlined is our attempt to engage with what
Boud, Cohen and Walker (1993, p. 9) call 'moving colleagues beyond their
experience and what they observe around them into new worlds of practice'. Ottewill et al. (2002) point to seven ways in which case studies can
inform educational development in this way:
I.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

By arousing curiosity thus preparing the way for experimentation.
By disseminating good practice.
By moving the emphasis from how to do something to how it has
been done by others.
By stimulating ideas and discussion and reflective practice.
By helping to develop learning communities.
By providing legitimacy for variety in educational practice.
By providing a basis for generalisation on the basis of collective experience.
(Brew and Peseta, 2004, p. IO)

The intention of larger case studies is to encourage reflection, rich practice
descriptions, and to identify recurring themes, motifs and metaphors.

34

The Good Supervisor

..,. Stories and narrative-based supervi sory
development

McCormack and Pamphilon (2002, 2004) use narratives in workshops as well
as self-study for supervisors. They comment:
Bruner ( 1986) has argued that narrative is one of only t\VO primary knowledge forms, the other being the paradigmatic form typified by scientific
logic. To narrate a life experience is to tell a story and to create a story, in
a way that is coherent to both the narrator and the audience. By appropri
ating, interpreting and retelling the past from the perspective of the
present, the self constructs itself (Kerby, 199 1). Further, this personal
sense making must be ackno•vledged as a dialectic engaging the person
within her/his cultural location. As people interact with the popular and
rnarginal narratives of their culture, they learn ho•N to regard themselves
and how to make themselves intelligible to others. (McCormack and
Pamphilon, 2004. p. 25)
McCormack and Pamphilon's workshop manual (2002) provides a wellresearched argurnent for the use of narratives and storytelling for persona l
and professional development purposes. In their workshops with postgraduate supervisors. they base group \.vork and individual reflection around
typical scenarios or stories of postgraduate supervision and postgraduate
research, constructed from discussions and interviews with others. individu
ally or in groups. It is important to involve those seeking development in the
construction of their own stories, their own versions of supervisory activities
arising from renection upon examples. Reflection and deliberation enable
supervisors to interpret, question, develop and own values and good practice
for postgraduate supervision. The articulation of ideas and practice forma tion arise from storytelling and sharing.
Inviting people to share their stories as a way of understanding experience
is a well-established procedure in group work. Naming experience (Linden,
1999) and the extensive analysis of stories over several sessions in collective
memory work (Haug, 1987; Lee and Williams, 1999; McCormack, 1998) are
examples of this. Storytelling, as McCormack and Pamphilon tell us, is ·a
strategy used by therapists' (White, 1997; While and Epston, 1990). It has
parallels with the feminist consciousness-raising groups of the 1970s and
1980s.
her / his story may be appropriate or problematic, functional or dysfunctional. However at the centre of most approaches is the belief that the

Supervisors Studying: Development Programmes

35

individual rnust learn how to change her /his story to a better one. By
locating the problem within the individual no account is taken of the
discursive locations of that person and the impact of contradictory and
competing discourses on the individual. A post-modern understanding of
the issue allows a more complex awareness of the individual to emerge.
(McCormack and Pamphilon. 2002, p. 26)
This is suitable in group work that addresses the needs of a variety of individual supervisors. Postmodern use of storytelling does not aim to help find
'the Truth' and any single 'right' way to carry out supervision. Instead. using
storytelling as a basis for identifying varieties of the role and good practice
enables acknowledgement that supervision takes place in a cultural, histori
cal. economic context related to the subject area and mode of supervisory
relationships.

~

Using stories and narratives built from experience

Stories open an individual (and group participants) to the possibility of re
storying their life because such narratives have the potential to reveal
both t11e 1nd1vidual and the collective nature of expt!rit:nce (McConnack
and Pamphilon. 1998; Richardson. 1990. 1997). Stories act as a mirror \Ve learn about ourselves - but also as a window - a way of looking into
the past, present and future experiences of others (Jalongo. !senberg and
Gerbracht. 1995). Searching for the individual and the collective aspects in
stories encourages readers to examine and question their own experiences. (McCormack and Pamphilon, 2004, pp. 3-4)
Boud. Keogh and Walker (l 985) suggest that a three-part process of describing the experience. attending to feelings and interrogating the story enables
readers or participants in group processes lo turn experience into learning.
Questioning and reinterpreting enables consideration of ·new perspectives
on an experience· leading to 'changes in behaviour· (p. 34). I hope you could
use a similar structured questioning process to take you through the chapters
and onto suggestions for good practice that have arisen from workshops on
good supervisory practice in a variety of contexts. tn the process you could
uncover your own assumptions and constructs (myths) about what you do as
a supervisor, what you feel is successful, what might work in other contexts,
what is less successful, what needs some development, and where you
might move to next in your practice. Following a reflective questioning
process is helpful (see the box on p. 36).

36

The Good Supervisor

Levels of reflective questioning
Describe the experience

•
•
•

What, in your words, is the story being told here?
What is the point of the story?
To whal extent is this also your story?

•

In what ways is it different from your story?

Attend to feelings

•
•

What feelings did the sto1y trigger?
What do those feelings reveal about your experience of the story teller?

•

\"/hat do those feelings reveal about your experience?

•
•
•
•
•

\"/hat positive responses are in the story?
How do you feel about these responses?
Are sorne responses not present? Which ones?
Why might they be absent?
How do you feel about their absence?

Interrogate the story

•
•
•
•
•

Are there vvords or concepts that suggest a particular world view?
Which cultural values are elevated in this story?
\tVhat ways of being have been elevated in this story?
What might be the history of these w ays of th inking?
What other ways of being and thinking are made invisible by this
vvay of thinking?

Source: McCormack and Pamphilon (2004) using Boud et al. ( 1993) pp. 7- 8

Brew and Peseta's (2004) have drawn up a list of criteria for good supervisory practice, developed from online work and accompanying research (see
the box on p. 37).
At Anglia Polytechnic University (APU) a workshop programme is now
augmented by online 'blended' support in line with Australian examples.
Colleagues can visit the site and/or undertake a newly validated MA module
in postgraduate supervision. based on working through the Online
programme.
Our sense al APU was that, because of the likely academic track record
and position of supervisors, as well as their varied bul often extensive expe-

Supervisors Studying: Development Programmes

37

Criteria for good supervisory practice

2

3

4

5
6

7

8

9

l0

Interest in and enthusiasm for the supervision of postgraduate
research students.
Appreciation of a range of good practice approaches to supervision and an understanding of what constitutes a productive
research learning environment.
Establishment, for and with students, of clear goats and expectations in the light of up to-date knowledge of the University's
requirements.
Productive and regular meetings held with students, which
provide them with sympathetic, responsive and effective academic, professional and personal support and guidance.
Careful management of the supervisory process to achieve timely
and successful completion of the thesis.
Development of a partnership with students that takes account of
the need to assist them to develop a range of generic attributes
and to introduce them to the research community.
Open communications establ ished with students with timely feed back, which is both supportive and challenging, given on
progress.
Utilisation of a repertoire of supervisory strategies to take account
of the differing and diverse needs of individual students, including
assisting students from equity groups and those off-campus to
achieve success in their study.
Evidence of systematic evaluation of competency in supervisory
skills and of critical renection and engagement with salient and
emergent issues in their own field of research, to improve supervisory practice.
Use, by the supervisor, of the literature on the scholarship of
supervision pedagogy, and of relevant policy issues in research

education lo enhance the postgraduate research experience of
their students.
source: Brew and Peseta (2004)

rience, a developrnental forum that enabled reflection, aided identification
and the sharing of good practice, making the implicit explicit, would be most
appropriate. beneficial and likely to encourage supervisor 'buy-in', while a
more structured and didactic programme would not. There is a precedent in

38

The Good Supervisor

terms of resources and provocative thoughts Online in the UK: Pat Cryer's
website: http:/ / ww\v.cryer.freeserve.co.uk/supervisors.hlm. This is a 'one
stop' web resource for information and advice on research supervision; a
resource rather than a course. Jn Australia, the FIRST progran1me is a developed online site maintained by Jo MacKenzie at the University of Technology
in Sydney (UTS), \Vhich pulls together specifically rewritten materials for
supervisory development online.
Peter Kand lbinder and Tai Peseta {2000a) have launched an on line and
workshop support rnodel so that:
supervisors could choose to complete the programme as nexibly as their
schedules perm itted. Sorrie supervisors completed just the vJeb-based
modules, some only attended the 1,vorkshop programme, while others
elected for a combination of both. (Kandlbinder and Peseta, 2000a,

p. I)
They built a flexible learning programme of three interrelated elerrients: webbased resources, workshops and supervisor case studies. Self-study enabled
supervisors to work through the prograrnme in a variety of ways, or to
access just the elements they felt they needed when they wanted to. A key
element is an online discussion forum aimed at encouraging reflection.
Similarly. Geoff Hill and colleagues at the Queensland University of
Technology (QUT) use 'journeying postgraduate supervision', tapping into
the narralives of postgraduates and supervisors, developing their practice,
identifying with journeys, experiences and the case studies of others and
reflecting on implications for their own practice.
In the UK, the Open University (OU) EdD supervisory forum uses First Class
to promote onl ine discussion of supervisory issues and practice, part of the
OU's support for postgraduates, undergraduates and supervisors ('First Class'
is an online messaging and discussion environment which is passwordprotected). Supervisors have a staff room on a virtual campus with bulletin
boards, chat rooms and a supervisor development forum . J e-moderated a
six-week long discussion in 2002. The OU have the infrastructure to support
a complex development; at APU, they do not. The activity there was necessarily going to be srrialler.
The idea of an on line supervisors' developrnent forum for APU supervisors
came about from my experience of supervising Israeli, Arab, Chinese and
African postgraduates at a distance. As a supervisor and 'guard ian supervisor' of the Israeli PhD programme, I felt I needed to discover and share
examples of good practice between myself and other colleagues in a similar
situation. Distance supervision is a rather lonely, sometimes troubling role,

Supervisors Studying: Development Programmes

39

although as students begin to develop their clarity of thought and writing
skills, it is also a very rewarding cultural experience. r was convinced that
supervisors needed some support for their own role development. Since
January 2003 I have been interviewing students, post docs and supervisors
about their supervision experiences. They all have stories to tell - mostly

very positive - about their relationship with their students and supervisors at
a distance. However it can be difficult to get in touch with supervisor
colleagues living far away, but establishing an online supervisory development forum can go some way towards facilitating the sharing of practice and
support.
The programme had to be designed to augment face-to-face provision;
specifically to address the needs of distance supervising affected by cultural
difference; bring together groups of supervisors spread widely around the
country; provide a discussion forum and means of keeping in touch with
supervisors; and provide a staff room in which to exchange and develop
good practice. This dovetailed with an opportunity to produce an accredited
MA Learning and Teaching module for supervisors. Our intentions were to
produce an online supervisory development provision that could provide
developmental support and the option of an accredited programme for both
new and well-established supervisors.
Our development was fed by our different experiences and by ongoing
discussions with both students and supervisors on the programme. Some of
these we felt were rather more analytical and specific to the programme
itself and others generic to supervision . Supervisor /student interactions,
worki ng w ith international students, learning styles, supervising at a
distance (see Chapter 13) have all formed discussion and development
topics. Strategies developed to address these include ensuring that distance
supervision encourages the appropriate critical, reflective, developmental
and research-as-learning practices .

..,. Why an online support and development
programme?
We wished to build a community of practice and so an online and face -toface (blended) mode suited us best.
It is assumed that supervisors would find a variety of online provision
differently suited to their needs and interests at different times. To this end, a
team of six put together a WEB CT-, then ANET-based online supervisory
support and development programme comprising:

