A Manual for Writers of Research Papers, Theses, and
Dissertations

On Writing, Editing, and Publishing
Jacques Barzun
Tricks of the Trade
Howard S. Becker
Writing for Social Scientists
Howard S. Becker
Permissions, A Survival Guide: Blunt Talk about Art as Intellectual Property
Susan M. Bielstein
The Craft of Translation
John Biguenet and
Rainer Schulte, editors
The Craft of Research
Wayne C. Booth,
Gregory G. Colomb, and
Joseph M. Williams
Glossary of Typesetting Terms
Richard Eckersley,
Richard Angstadt,
Charles M. Ellerston,
Richard Hendel,
Naomi B. Pascal, and
Anita Walker Scott
Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes
Robert M. Emerson,
Rachel I. Fretz, and

www.itpub.net

Linda L. Shaw
Legal Writing in Plain English
Bryan A. Garner
From Dissertation to Book
William Germano
Getting It Published
William Germano
A Poet's Guide to Poetry
Mary Kinzie
The Chicago Guide to Collaborative Ethnography
Luke Eric Lassiter
Doing Honest Work in College
Charles Lipson
How to Write a BA Thesis
Charles Lipson
Cite Right
Charles Lipson
The Chicago Guide to Writing about Multivariate Analysis
Jane E. Miller
The Chicago Guide to Writing about Numbers
Jane E. Miller
Mapping It Out
Mark Monmonier
The Chicago Guide to Communicating Science
Scott L. Montgomery

Indexing Books
Nancy C. Mulvany
Getting into Print
Walter W. Powell
Tales of the Field
John Van Maanen
Style
Joseph M. Williams
A Handbook of Biological Illustration
Frances W. Zweifel

Chicago Style for Students and Researchers

Kate L. Turabian

Revised by Wayne C. Booth, Gregory G. Colomb, Joseph M.
Williams, and University of Chicago Press Editorial Staff
The University of Chicago Press
Chicago and London

www.itpub.net

Publisher's note: Given the complex formatting of this work, its presentation on an electronic device may differ
slightly from the print book. Every care has been taken to ensure that readers of this eBook will be able to
navigate the content easily and effectively.
Portions of this book have been adapted from The Craft of Research, 2nd edition, by Wayne C. Booth, Gregory
G. Colomb, and Joseph M. Williams, © 1995, 2003 by The University of Chicago; and from The Chicago
Manual of Style, 15th edition, © 1982, 1993, 2003 by The University of Chicago.
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London
© 2007 by The University of Chicago
All rights reserved. Published 2007
Printed in the United States of America
16 15 14 13 12 11 10 09 08 07

1 2 3 4 5

ISBN-13: 978-0-226-82338-6 (electronic)
ISBN-13: 978-0-226-82336-2 (cloth)
ISBN-13: 978-0-226-82337-9 (paper)
ISBN-10: 0-226-82336-9 (cloth)
ISBN-10: 0-226-82337-7 (paper)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Turabian, Kate L.
A manual for writers of research papers, theses, and dissertations : Chicago style for students and
researchers / Kate L. Turabian; revised by Wayne C. Booth, Gregory G. Colomb, Joseph M. Williams, and
University of Chicago Press editorial staff.—7th ed.
p. cm.
“Portions of this book have been adapted from The Craft of Research, 2nd edition, by Wayne C. Booth,
Gregory G. Colomb, and Joseph M. Williams, © 1995, 2003 by The University of Chicago; and from The
Chicago Manual of Style, 15th edition, © 1982, 1993, 2003 by The University of Chicago.”
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-226-82336-2 (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN-13: 978-0-226-82337-9 (pbk. : alk. paper)
ISBN-13: 978-0-226-82338-6 (electronic)
ISBN-10: 0-226-82336-9 (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-226-82337-7 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Dissertations, Academic—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Academic writing—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I.
Title.
LB2369.T8 2007
808.02—dc22

2006025443
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of the American National Standard for
Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1992.

Contents
A Note to Students
Preface
Acknowledgments

Part I Research and Writing: From Planning to Production
Wayne C. Booth, Gregory G. Colomb, and Joseph M. Williams
Overview of Part I
1 What Research Is and How Researchers Think about It
1.1 How Researchers Think about Their Aims
1.2 Three Kinds of Questions That Researchers Ask
2 Moving from a Topic to a Question to a Working Hypothesis
2.1 Find a Question in Your Topic
2.2 Propose Some Working Answers
2.3 Build a Storyboard to Plan and Guide Your Work
2.4 Organize a Writing Support Group
3 Finding Useful Sources
3.1 Understand the Kinds of Sources Readers Expect You to Use
3.2 Record Your Sources Fully, Accurately, and Appropriately
3.3 Search for Sources Systematically
3.4 Evaluate Sources for Relevance and Reliability
3.5 Look beyond the Usual Kinds of References
4 Engaging Sources
4.1 Read Generously to Understand, Then Critically to Engage and Evaluate
4.2 Take Notes Systematically
4.3 Take Useful Notes
4.4 Write as You Read
4.5 Review Your Progress
4.6 Manage Moments of Normal Panic
5 Planning Your Argument
5.1 What a Research Argument Is and Is Not
5.2 Build Your Argument around Answers to Readers' Questions
5.3 Turn Your Working Hypothesis into a Claim
5.4 Assemble the Elements of Your Argument
5.5 Distinguish Arguments Based on Evidence from Arguments Based on Warrants
5.6 Assemble an Argument
6 Planning a First Draft
6.1 Avoid Unhelpful Plans
6.2 Create a Plan That Meets Your Readers' Needs
6.3 File Away Leftovers
7 Drafting Your Report
7.1 Draft in the Way That Feels Most Comfortable
7.2 Develop Productive Drafting Habits

www.itpub.net

7.3 Use Your Key Terms to Keep Yourself on Track
7.4 Quote, Paraphrase, and Summarize Appropriately
7.5 Integrate Quotations into Your Text
7.6 Use Footnotes and Endnotes Judiciously
7.7 Interpret Complex or Detailed Evidence before You Offer It
7.8 Be Open to Surprises
7.9 Guard against Inadvertent Plagiarism
7.10 Guard against Inappropriate Assistance
7.11 Work through Chronic Procrastination and Writer's Block
8 Presenting Evidence in Tables and Figures
8.1 Choose Verbal or Visual Representations
8.2 Choose the Most Effective Graphic
8.3 Design Tables and Figures
8.4 Communicate Data Ethically
9 Revising Your Draft
9.1 Check Your Introduction, Conclusion, and Claim
9.2 Make Sure the Body of Your Report Is Coherent
9.3 Check Your Paragraphs
9.4 Let Your Draft Cool, Then Paraphrase It
10 Writing Your Final Introduction and Conclusion
10.1 Draft Your Final Introduction
10.2 Draft Your Final Conclusion
10.3 Write Your Title Last
11 Revising Sentences
11.1 Focus on the First Seven or Eight Words of a Sentence
11.2 Diagnose What You Read
11.3 Choose the Right Word
11.4 Polish It Off
11.5 Give It Up and Print It Out
12 Learning from Your Returned Paper
12.1 Find General Principles in Specific Comments
12.2 Talk to Your Instructor
13 Presenting Research in Alternative Forums
13.1 Plan Your Oral Presentation
13.2 Design Your Presentation to Be Listened To
13.3 Plan Your Poster Presentation
13.4 Plan Your Conference Proposal
14 On the Spirit of Research
Part II Source Citation

15 General Introduction to Citation Practices
15.1 Reasons for Citing Your Sources
15.2 The Requirements of Citation
15.3 Two Citation Styles
15.4 Citation of Electronic Sources
15.5 Preparation of Citations
15.6 A Word on Citation Software
16 Notes-Bibliography Style: The Basic Form
16.1 Basic Patterns
16.2 Bibliographies
16.3 Notes
16.4 Short Forms for Notes
17 Notes-Bibliography Style: Citing Specific Types of Sources
17.1 Books
17.2 Journal Articles
17.3 Magazine Articles
17.4 Newspaper Articles
17.5 Additional Types of Published Sources
17.6 Unpublished Sources
17.7 Informally Published Electronic Sources
17.8 Sources in the Visual and Performing Arts
17.9 Public Documents
17.10 One Source Quoted in Another
18 Parenthetical Citations–Reference List Style: The Basic Form
18.1 Basic Patterns
18.2 Reference Lists
18.3 Parenthetical Citations
19 Parenthetical Citations–Reference List Style: Citing Specific Types of Sources
19.1 Books
19.2 Journal Articles
19.3 Magazine Articles
19.4 Newspaper Articles
19.5 Additional Types of Published Sources
19.6 Unpublished Sources
19.7 Informally Published Electronic Sources
19.8 Sources in the Visual and Performing Arts
19.9 Public Documents
19.10 One Source Quoted in Another
Part III Style
20 Spelling

www.itpub.net

20.1 Plurals
20.2 Possessives
20.3 Compounds and Words Formed with Prefixes
20.4 Line Breaks
21 Punctuation
21.1 Period
21.2 Comma
21.3 Semicolon
21.4 Colon
21.5 Question Mark
21.6 Exclamation Point
21.7 Hyphen and Dashes
21.8 Parentheses and Brackets
21.9 Slashes
21.10 Quotation Marks
21.11 Multiple Punctuation Marks
22 Names, Special Terms, and Titles of Works
22.1 Names
22.2 Special Terms
22.3 Titles of Works
23 Numbers
23.1 Words or Numerals?
23.2 Plurals and Punctuation
23.3 Date Systems
23.4 Numbers Used outside the Text
24 Abbreviations
24.1 General Principles
24.2 Names and Titles
24.3 Geographical Terms
24.4 Time and Dates
24.5 Units of Measure
24.6 The Bible and Other Sacred Works
24.7 Abbreviations in Citations and Other Scholarly Contexts
25 Quotations
25.1 Quoting Accurately and Avoiding Plagiarism
25.2 Incorporating Quotations into Your Text
25.3 Modifying Quotations
26 Tables and Figures
26.1 General Issues
26.2 Tables
26.3 Figures

Appendix: Paper Format and Submission
A.1 General Format Requirements
A.2 Format Requirements for Specific Elements
A.3 Submission Requirements
Bibliography
Authors
Index

A Note to Students
Now in its seventh edition, A Manual for Writers of Research Papers, Theses, and
Dissertations has helped generations of students successfully research, write, and submit their
papers. Most commonly known to its dedicated users as “Turabian,” the name of the original
author, A Manual for Writers is the authoritative student resource on “Chicago style.”
If you are writing a research paper, you may be told to follow Chicago style for citations
and for issues of mechanics, such as capitalization and abbreviations. Chicago style is widely
used by students in all disciplines. For citations, you may use one of two styles recommended
by Chicago. In the humanities and some social sciences, you will likely use notesbibliography style, while in the natural and physical sciences (and some social sciences) you
may use parenthetical citations–reference list (or “author-date”) style. A Manual for Writers
explains and illustrates both styles.
In addition to detailed information on Chicago style, this seventh edition includes a new
part by Wayne C. Booth, Gregory G. Colomb, and Joseph M. Williams that covers every step
of the research and writing process. This section provides practical advice to help you
formulate the right questions, read critically, build arguments, and revise your draft.

Preface
Students writing research papers, theses, and dissertations in today's colleges and universities
inhabit a world filled with electronic technologies that were unimagined in 1937—the year
Kate L. Turabian, University of Chicago's dissertation secretary, assembled a booklet of
guidelines for student writers. The availability of Internet sources and word-processing
software has changed the way students conduct research and write up the results. But these
technologies have not altered the basic task of the student writer: doing well-designed
research and presenting it clearly and accurately, while following accepted academic
standards for citation, style, and format.
Turabian's 1937 booklet reflected guidelines found in A Manual of Style, 10th edition—an
already classic resource for writers and editors published by the University of Chicago Press.
The Press began distributing Turabian's booklet in 1947 and first published the work in book
form in 1955, under the title A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations.
Turabian revised the work twice more, updating it to meet students' needs and to reflect the

www.itpub.net

latest recommendations of the Manual of Style. In time, Turabian's book has become a
standard reference for students of all levels at universities and colleges across the country.
Turabian died in 1987 at age ninety-four, a few months after publication of the fifth edition.
For that edition, as well as the sixth (1996), the Press invited editorial staff to carry out the
revisions.
For this seventh edition, Wayne C. Booth, Gregory G. Colomb, and Joseph M. Williams
have expanded the focus of the book. The new part 1, “Research and Writing: From Planning
to Production,” is adapted from their Craft of Research (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2003). This part offers a step-by-step guide to the process of research and its reporting,
a topic not previously covered in this manual but inseparable from source citation, writing
style, and the mechanics of paper preparation. Among the topics covered are the nature of
research, finding and engaging sources, taking notes, developing an argument, drafting and
revising, and presenting evidence in tables and figures. Also included is a discussion of
presenting research in alternative forums. In this part, the authors write in a familiar, collegial
voice to engage readers in a complex topic. Students undertaking research projects at all
levels will benefit from reading this part, though advanced researchers may wish to skim
chapters 1–4.
The rest of the book covers the same topics as past editions, but has been extensively
revised to follow the recommendations in The Chicago Manual of Style, 15th edition (2003),
to incorporate current technology as it affects all aspects of student writing, to provide
updated examples, and to be easier to read and use.
Reflecting the close connection between the research process and the need for careful and
appropriate citation form, “Source Citation” now appears as part 2 of the manual. In this part,
chapter 15 offers an overview of scholarly citation, including its relationship not just to good
research practices but to the ethics of research. Students using notes-bibliography style for
citations (common in the humanities and some social sciences) should then read chapter 16
for a discussion of the basic form for citations and consult chapter 17 as needed for a wide
range of source examples. Students using parenthetical citations–reference list style (common
in most social sciences and in the natural and physical sciences) will find the same types of
information in chapters 18 and 19. Both sets of chapters include updated examples and new
coverage of how to cite online and other electronic sources.
Part 3, “Style,” addresses issues that occupied the first half of previous editions of the
manual. Coverage of spelling and punctuation has been divided into separate chapters, as has
treatment of numbers and abbreviations. The chapter on names, special terms, and titles of
works has been expanded. The final two chapters in this section treat the mechanics of using
quotations and graphics (tables and figures), topics that are discussed from a rhetorical
perspective in part 1. Student writers may wish to read these chapters in their entirety or
consult them for guidance on particular points.
The recommendations in parts 2 and 3 diverge in a few instances from those in The
Chicago Manual of Style, but the differences are matters of degree, not substance. In certain
cases, this manual recommends just one editorial style where CMOS recommends two or
more. Sometimes the choice is a matter of simplicity (as in the rules for headline-style
capitalization presented in chapter 22); other times it reflects what is appropriate for student
papers, as opposed to published works (as in the requirement of access dates with all citations
from online sources). The chapters on citation include new types of sources, such as Weblogs,

that have emerged since 2003 and thus are not treated in the current edition of CMOS.
These recommendations logically extend principles set forth in CMOS.
The appendix gathers in one place the material on paper format and submission that formed
the core of Kate Turabian's original booklet. In the years since, this material has become the
primary authority for dissertation offices throughout the nation. In revising this material, the
Press sought the advice of dissertation officials at a variety of public and private universities,
including those named in the acknowledgments section. While continuing to emphasize the
importance of consistency, the guidelines now allow more flexibility in matters such as the
placement of page numbers and the typography of titles, reflecting the capabilities of current
word-processing software. The sample pages presented are new and are adapted from
exemplary dissertations submitted to the University of Chicago since 2000. This appendix is
intended primarily for students writing PhD dissertations and master's and undergraduate
theses, but the sections on format requirements and electronic file preparation also apply to
those writing class papers.
The guidelines in this manual offer practical solutions to a wide range of issues
encountered by student writers, but they may be supplemented—or even overruled—by the
conventions of specific disciplines or the preferences of particular institutions or departments.
All of the chapters on style and format remind students to review the requirements of their
university, department, or instructor, which take precedence over the guidelines presented
here. The expanded bibliography, organized by subject area, lists sources for research and
style issues specific to particular disciplines.

Acknowledgments
Revising a book that has been used by millions of students over seventy years is no small
task. The challenge of bringing Kate Turabian's creation into the twenty-first century was
taken up first by Linda J. Halvorson, then editorial director for reference books at the
University of Chicago Press, who recognized how the needs of the student writer had changed
since the publication of the sixth edition in 1996 and developed a revision plan to address
those changing needs.
The key to this plan was assembling a revision team that understood how the Turabian
tradition could be reshaped for students researching and writing papers in an electronic age.
Wayne C. Booth, Gregory G. Colomb, and Joseph M. Williams contributed their expertise
both as teachers and as authors of numerous books on the subject of research and writing,
including The Craft of Research. The Press's editorial staff was represented on the revision
team first by Margaret Perkins, now director of manuscript editing at the New England
Journal of Medicine, and later by Mary E. Laur, senior project editor for reference books.
Both had played critical roles in the preparation of The Chicago Manual of Style, 15th edition,
from which parts 2 and 3 of this book are adapted.
Throughout the revision process, the manuscript (partial and complete) benefited from the
advice of reviewers with expertise in various aspects of student research and writing,
including Susan Allan (American Journal of Sociology), Christopher S. Allen (international
affairs, University of Georgia), Anna Nibley Baker (HealthInsight), Howard Becker (San
Francisco), Paul S. Boyer (history, University of Wisconsin–Madison), Christopher Buck

www.itpub.net

(writing, rhetoric, and American cultures, Michigan State University), David Campbell
(political science, University of Notre Dame), Erik Carlson (University of Chicago Press),
Michael D. Coogan (religious studies, Stonehill College), Daniel Greene (U.S. Holocaust
Memorial Museum), Anne Kelly Knowles (geography, Middlebury College), Lewis Lancaster
(East Asian languages and cultures, University of California–Berkeley), Luke Eric Lassiter
(humanities, Marshall University Graduate College), James Leloudis (history, University of
North Carolina–Chapel Hill), Kurt Mosser (philosophy, University of Dayton), Gerald
Mulderig (English, DePaul University), Emily S. Rosenberg (history, University of
California–Irvine), Anita Samen (University of Chicago Press), Paul Stoller (anthropology
and sociology, West Chester University), Anne B. Thistle (biological science, Florida State
University), and Richard Valelly (political science, Swarthmore College).
The successors of Kate Turabian at a variety of public and private universities offered
valuable insights on dissertation preparation and submission. Reviewers of the appendix
included Philippa K. Carter from the University of Pittsburgh; Matthew Hill from the
University of Maryland, College Park; Elena Hsiao-ching Hsu from the University of
Wisconsin–Madison; Johanna E. D. Parker from the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign; and Christine Quigley from Georgetown University. The current occupant of
Turabian's own position at the University of Chicago, Colleen Mullarkey, reviewed the
manuscript in its entirety and also helped identify the exemplary dissertations from which the
sample pages in the appendix are drawn. The authors of these dissertations, who granted
permission for their text to be used, are identified in the captions of the relevant figures.
Turning the manuscript into a book required the efforts of another team at the Press. Carol
Fisher Saller edited the manuscript, Randolph Petilos proofread the pages, and Victoria Baker
prepared the index. Michael Brehm provided the design, while Sylvia Mendoza Hecimovich
supervised the production. Christopher Rhodes offered editorial assistance throughout the
project. Carol Kasper, Ellen Gibson, and Laura Anderson brought the finished product to
market.
The loss of Wayne Booth when the manuscript was nearly complete touched everyone
involved with the project, which will stand as his last new work.

PART I
Research and Writing
From Planning to Production
Wayne C. Booth, Gregory G. Colomb, and Joseph M. Williams

Overview of Part I
We know how challenged you can feel when you start a substantial research project, whether
it's a PhD dissertation, a BA or master's thesis, or just a long class paper. But you can handle
any project if you break it into its parts, then work on them one step at a time. This part shows
you how to do that.

We first discuss the aims of research and what readers will expect of any research report.
Then we focus on how to find a research question whose answer is worth your time and your
readers' attention; how to find and use information from sources to back up your answer; then
how to plan, draft, and revise your report so your readers will think your answer is based on
sound reasoning and reliable evidence.
Several themes run through this part.
You can't plunge into a project blindly; you must plan it, then keep the whole process in
mind as you take each step. So think big, but break the process down into small goals that
you can meet one at a time.
Your best research will begin with a question that you want to answer. But you must then
imagine readers asking a question of their own: So what if you don't answer it? Why should
I care?
From the outset, you should try to write every day, not just to take notes on your sources
but to clarify what you think of them. You should also write down your own developing
ideas to get them out of the cozy warmth of your head into the cold light of day, where you
can see if they still make sense. You probably won't use much of this writing in your final
draft, but it is essential preparation for it.
No matter how carefully you do your research, readers will judge it by how well you
report it, so you must know what they will look for in a clearly written report that earns
their respect.
If you're an advanced researcher, skim chapters 1–4. You will see there much that's
familiar, but if you're also teaching, it may help you explain what you know to your students
more effectively. (Many experienced researchers report that chapters 5–12 have helped them
not only explain to others how to do research and report it, but also to draft and revise their
own reports more quickly and effectively.)
If you're just starting your career in research, you'll find every chapter of part 1 useful.
Skim it all for an overview of the process; then as you work through your project, reread
chapters relevant to your immediate task.
You may feel that the steps described here are too many to remember, but you can manage
them if you take them one at a time, and as you do more research, they'll become habits of
mind. Don't think, however, that you must follow these steps in exactly the order we present
them. Researchers regularly think ahead to future steps as they work through earlier ones and
revisit earlier steps as they deal with a later one. (That explains why we so often refer you
ahead to anticipate a later stage in the process and back to revisit an earlier one.) And even the
most systematic researcher has unexpected insights that send her off in a new direction. Work
from a plan, but be ready to depart from it, even to discard it for a new one.
If you're a very new researcher, you may also think that some matters we discuss are
beyond your immediate needs. We know that a ten-page class paper differs from a PhD
dissertation. But both require a kind of thinking that even the newest researcher can start
practicing. You begin your journey toward full competence when you not only know what lies

www.itpub.net

ahead but can also start practicing the skills that experienced researchers began to learn
when they were where you are now.
No book can prepare you for every aspect of a research project. And this one won't help
you with the specific methodologies in fields such as psychology, economics, or philosophy,
much less physics, chemistry, or biology. Nor does it tell you how to adapt what you learn
about academic research to business or professional settings.
But it does provide an overview of the processes and habits of mind that underlie all
research, wherever it's done, and of the plans you must make to assemble a report, draft it, and
revise it. With that knowledge and help from your teachers, you'll come to feel in control of
your projects, not intimidated by them, and eventually you'll learn to manage even the most
complex projects on your own, in both the academic and the professional worlds.
The first step in learning the skills of sound research is to understand how experienced
researchers think about its aims.

1 What Research Is and How Researchers
Think about It
1.1

How Researchers Think about Their Aims

1.2

Three Kinds of Questions That Researchers Ask
1.2.1

Conceptual Questions: What Should We Think?

1.2.2

Practical Questions: What Should We Do?

1.2.3

Applied Questions: What Must We Understand before We Know What to Do?

1.2.4

Choosing the Right Kind of Question

1.2.5

The Special Challenge of Conceptual Questions: Answering So What?

You do research every time you ask a question and look for facts to answer it, whether the
question is as simple as finding a plumber or as profound as discovering the origin of life.
When only you care about the answer or when others need just a quick report of it, you
probably won't write it out. But you must report your research in writing when others will
accept your claims only after they study how you reached them. In fact, reports of research
tell us most of what we can reliably believe about our world—that once there were dinosaurs,
that germs cause disease, even that the earth is round.

You may think your report will add little to the world's knowledge. Maybe so. But done
well, it will add a lot to yours and to your ability to do the next report. You may also think
that your future lies not in scholarly research but in business or a profession. But research is
as important outside the academy as in, and in most ways it is the same. So as you practice the
craft of academic research now, you prepare yourself to do research that one day will be
important at least to those you work with, perhaps to us all.
As you learn to do your own research, you also learn to use—and judge—that of others. In
every profession, researchers must read and evaluate reports before they make a decision, a
job you'll do better only after you've learned how others will judge yours. This book focuses
on research in the academic world, but every day, we read or hear about research that can
affect our lives. Before we believe those reports, though, we must think about them critically
to determine whether they are based on evidence and reasoning that we can trust.
To be sure, we can reach good conclusions in ways other than through reasons and
evidence: we can rely on tradition and authority or on intuition, spiritual insight, even on our
most visceral emotions. But when we try to explain to others not just why we believe our
claims but why they should too, we must do more than just state an opinion and describe our
feelings.
That is how a research report differs from other kinds of persuasive writing: it must rest on
shared facts that readers accept as truths independent of your feelings and beliefs. They must
be able to follow your reasoning from evidence that they accept to the claim you draw from it.
Your success as a researcher thus depends not just on how well you gather and analyze data,
but on how clearly you report your reasoning so that your readers can test and judge it before
making your claims part of their knowledge and understanding.

1.1 How Researchers Think about Their Aims
All researchers gather facts and information, what we're calling data. But depending on their
aims and experience, they use those data in different ways. Some researchers gather data on a
topic—stories about the Battle of the Alamo, for example—just to satisfy a personal interest
(or a teacher's assignment).
Most researchers, however, want us to know more than just facts. So they don't look for
just any data on a topic; they look for specific data that they can use as evidence to test and
support an answer to a question that their topic inspired them to ask, such as Why has the
Alamo story become a national legend?
Experienced researchers, however, know that they must do more than convince us that their
answer is sound. They must also show us why their question was worth asking, how its
answer helps us understand some bigger issue in a new way. If we can figure out why the
Alamo story has become a national legend, we might then answer a larger question: How
have regional myths shaped our national character?
You can judge how closely your thinking tracks that of an experienced researcher by
describing your project in a sentence like this:

www.itpub.net

1. I am working on the topic of X (stories about the Battle of the Alamo),
2. because I want to find out Y (why its story became a national legend),
3. so that I can help others understand Z (how such regional myths have shaped our national
character).

That sentence is worth a close look because it describes not just the progress of your research
but your personal growth as a researcher.
1. “I am working on the topic of . . . ” Researchers often begin with a simple topic like the
Battle of the Alamo, either because it was assigned, because something about it puzzles
them, or because it merely sparks an interest. But inexperienced researchers too often stop
there, leaving themselves with nothing but a topic to guide their work. They mound up
hundreds of notes, but have no way to decide what data to keep and what to discard. When
it comes time to write, they dump everything into a report that reads like a grab bag of
random facts. If those facts are new to readers who happen to be interested in the topic,
they might read the report. But even those readers will want to know what those facts add
up to.
2. “ . . . because I want to find out how or why . . . ” More experienced researchers usually
begin not with just a topic but with a research question, such as Why has the story of the
Alamo become a national legend? And they know that readers will think their facts add up
to something only when those facts serve as evidence to support its answer. Indeed, only
with a question can a researcher know which facts to look for and which to keep—not just
those that support an answer, but also those that test or even discredit it. When he thinks he
has enough evidence to support his answer and can respond to data that seem to contradict
it, he writes a report first to test his own thinking, then to share his answer with others so
that they can test it too.
3. “ . . . so that I can help others understand . . . ” The most successful researchers,
however, realize that readers want to know not only that an answer is sound but why the
question was worth asking. So they anticipate that readers will ask a question of their own:
So what? Why should I care why the Alamo story has become a legend? That So what? can
vex even the most experienced researcher, but every researcher must try to answer it
before it's asked: If we can find that out, we might better understand the bigger question of
how such stories shape our national character.
But a shrewd researcher doesn't stop there. She anticipates her readers' asking So what?
again by looking for another, still larger answer: And if we can understand what has shaped
our national character, we might understand better who we Americans think we are. And
before you ask, when we know that, we might better understand why others in the world judge
us as they do. The most successful researchers know that readers care about a question only
when they think that its answer might encourage them to say not So what? but That's worth
knowing!
In short, not all questions are equally good. We might ask how many cats slept in the
Alamo the night before the battle, but so what if we find out? It is hard to see how an answer
would help us think about any larger issue worth understanding, so it's a question that's
probably not worth asking (though as we'll see, we could be wrong about that).

1.2 Three Kinds of Questions That Researchers Ask
Experienced researchers also know that different readers expect them to ask and answer
different kinds of questions. The most common questions in academic work are conceptual.
The ones most common in the professions are practical.
1.2.1 Conceptual Questions: What Should We Think?
A question is conceptual when your answer to So what? doesn't tell readers what to do, but
helps them understand some issue:
1. I am working on the topic of X,
2. because I want to find out how/why/whether Y, (So what if you do?)
3. so that I can help others understand how/why/whether Z.

If you were explaining your research, the conversation might go like this:
I'm working on the topic of risk evaluation.
Why?
Because I want to find out how ordinary people evaluate the risk that they will be hurt by terrorism.
So what if you do?
Once I do, we might better understand the bigger question of how emotional and rational factors interact to
influence the way ordinary thinkers think about risk.

Researchers in the humanities and the social and natural sciences work mostly on
conceptual questions, such as How did Shakespeare's political environment influence his
plays? What caused the extinction of most large North American mammals? What are comets
made of? The answers to those questions don't tell us how to change the world, but they do
help us understand it better.
To be sure, the answer to a conceptual question often turns out to be unexpectedly relevant
to solving a practical problem. And before we can solve any important practical problem, we
usually must do conceptual research to understand it better. But in most of the academic
world, the primary aim of most researchers is only to improve our understanding.
1.2.2 Practical Questions: What Should We Do?
You pose a different kind of question—call it a practical one—when your answer to So what?
tells readers what to do to change or fix some troublesome or at least improvable situation:
1. I am working on the topic of X,
2. because I want to find out Y, (So what if you do?)
3. so that I can tell readers what to do to fix/improve Z.

You would explain your work on a practical question like this:

www.itpub.net

I'm working on the topic of communicating risk effectively.
Why?
Because I want to find out what psychological factors cause ordinary Americans to exaggerate their personal risk
from a terrorist attack.
So what if you do?
Then I can tell the government how to counteract those factors when they communicate with the public about the
real risk of terrorism.

Practical questions are most common outside the academic world, especially in business. In
academic fields such as health care and engineering, researchers sometimes ask practical
questions, but more often they ask a third kind of question that's neither purely practical nor
purely conceptual: call it an applied research question.
1.2.3 Applied Questions: What Must We Understand before We Know What to Do?
Often, we know we must do something to solve a practical problem, but before we can know
what that is, we must do research to understand the problem better. We can call that kind of
research applied. With this middle kind of question, the third step raises a question whose
answer is not the solution to a practical problem, but only a step toward it.
I want to find out how Americans have changed their daily lives in response to the terrorist attacks on 9/11.
So what if you do?
Then we can understand the psychological factors that cause ordinary Americans to exaggerate their personal
risk from a terrorist attack.
So what if you do?
Then we can understand how to reduce the effects of those psychological factors.
So what if you do?
Then perhaps the government can use that information to communicate more effectively the real risk from
terrorism.

Applied questions are common in academic fields such as business, engineering, and
medicine and in companies and government agencies that do research to understand what
must be known before they can solve a problem.
1.2.4 Choosing the Right Kind of Question
Some new researchers dislike purely conceptual research questions because they think they're
too “theoretical” or irrelevant to the “real” world. So they try to cobble an implausible
practical use onto a conceptual answer: When we know how race shaped the political impact
of the Alamo stories, we can understand how racism has been used to foster patriotism and
thereby eliminate racist appeals to patriotism in relation to conflicts in the Middle East.

That impulse is understandable. But unless you've been assigned an applied or practical
problem, resist it. You are unlikely to solve any significant practical problem in a class paper,
and in any case, most of the academic world sees its mission not as fixing the problems of the
world directly, but as understanding them better (which may or may not help fix them).
1.2.5 The Special Challenge of Conceptual Questions: Answering So What?
With most practical questions, we don't have to answer So what? because the benefit is
usually obvious. Even most applied questions imply the practical benefits of their answers:
few readers would question why a researcher is trying to understand what causes Alzheimer's.
With conceptual questions, however, the answer to So what? is often not obvious at all, even
to an experienced researcher: So what if Shakespeare had Lady Macbeth die offstage rather
than on? So what if some cultures use masks in their religious rituals and others don't? Why
is it important to know that?
For a research paper in an introductory course, your instructor may be satisfied with any
plausible answer to So what? So if early in your research career you find yourself struggling
with that question, don't take it as a sign of failure, much less as evidence that you're not ready
to do the work. In fact, you might not discover the answer to So what? until you've drafted
your report, maybe not even until you've finished it. And even then, maybe the answer will
matter only to you.
But if your project is a thesis or dissertation, it's not just an advisor that you have to satisfy.
Your answer must also satisfy those in your field (represented by your advisor) who will
judge your work not just by the quality of your answer, but by the significance of your
question. Experienced researchers know that some readers, perhaps many, will read their
report and think I don't agree. They accept that as an inevitable part of sharing research on
significant issues. What they can't accept is I don't care.
So as hard as it will be, the more often you imagine others asking So what? and the more
often you try to answer it, if only to your own satisfaction, the more confident you can be that
eventually you'll learn to succeed at every experienced researcher's toughest task—to
convince your readers that your report is worth their time. (In chapter 10, we discuss how to
write an introduction that motivates your readers at least to start reading your report.)

2 Moving from a Topic to a Question to a
Working Hypothesis
2.1

Find a Question in Your Topic
2.1.1

Search Your Interests

2.1.2

Make Your Topic Manageable

www.itpub.net

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.1.3

Question Your Topic

2.1.4

Evaluate Your Questions

Propose Some Working Answers
2.2.1

Decide on a Working Hypothesis

2.2.2

Beware the Risks in a Working Hypothesis

2.2.3

If You Can't Find an Answer, Argue for Your Question

Build a Storyboard to Plan and Guide Your Work
2.3.1

State Your Question and Working Hypotheses

2.3.2

State Your Reasons

2.3.3

Sketch in the Kind of Evidence You Should Look For

2.3.4

Look at the Whole

Organize a Writing Support Group

A research project is more than collecting data. You start it before you log on to the Internet
or head for the library, and you continue it long after you have all the data you think you need.
In that process, you face countless specific tasks, but they all aim at just five general goals.
You must do the following:
Ask a question worth answering.
Find an answer that you can support with good reasons.
Find reliable evidence to support your reasons.
Draft a report that makes a good case for your answer.
Revise that draft until readers will think you met the first four goals.

You might even post those five goals in your workspace.
Research projects would be easy if you could march straight through those steps. But as
you've discovered (or soon will), research and its reporting are never straightforward. As you
do one task, you'll have to look ahead to others or revisit an earlier one. You'll change topics
as you read, search for more data as you draft, perhaps even discover a new question as you
revise. Research is looping, messy, and unpredictable. But it's manageable if you have a plan,
even when you know you'll depart from it.

2.1 Find a Question in Your Topic
Researchers begin projects in different ways. Many experienced ones begin with a question
that others in their field want to answer: What caused the extinction of most large North
American mammals? Others begin with just a vague intellectual itch that they have to scratch.
They might not know what puzzles them about giant sloths and mastodons, but they're willing
to spend time finding out whether they can translate their itch into a question worth
answering.
They know, moreover, that the best research question is not one whose answer others want
to know just for its own sake; it is one that helps them understand some larger issue (So what?
again). For example, if we knew why North American sloths disappeared, we might be able to
answer a larger question that puzzles many historical anthropologists: Did early Native
Americans live in harmony with nature, as some believe, or did they hunt its largest creatures
to extinction? (And if we knew that, then we might also understand. . . .)
Then there are those questions that just pop into a researcher's mind with no hint of where
they'll lead, sometimes about matters so seemingly trivial that only the researcher thinks
they're worth answering: Why does a coffee spill dry up in the form of a ring? Such a question
might lead nowhere, but you can't know that until you see its answer. In fact, the scientist
puzzled by coffee rings made discoveries about the behavior of fluids that others in his field
thought important—and that paint manufacturers found valuable. So who knows where you
might go with a question like How many cats slept in the Alamo the night before the battle?
You can't know until you get there.
In fact, a researcher's most valuable ability is the knack of being puzzled by ordinary
things: like the shape of coffee rings; or why Shakespeare has Lady Macbeth die offstage
rather than on; or why your eyebrows don't grow as long as the hair on your head. Cultivate
the ability to see what's odd in the commonplace and you'll never lack for research projects, as
either a student or a professional.
If you have a topic, skip to 2.1.3 to find questions in it. If you already have a question or
two, skip to 2.1.4 to test them by the criteria listed there. If you're still looking for a topic,
here's a plan to help you search for one.
2.1.1 Search Your Interests

www.itpub.net

If you can pick any topic appropriate to your field, ask these questions:
What topics do you already know something about? You can learn more.
What would you like to know more about? A place? A person? A time? An object? An
idea? A process?
Can you find a discussion list on the Web about issues that interest you?
What issues in your field have you debated with others, then found that you couldn't back
up your views with good reasons and evidence?
What issues do people outside your field misunderstand?
What topic is your instructor working on? Would she like you to explore a part of it?
Don't be too shy to ask.
Does your library have rich resources in some field? Ask your instructor or a librarian.
What other courses will you take in your field or out of it? Find a textbook, and skim it
for study questions.
If you have a job in mind, what kind of research report might help you get it? Employers
often ask for samples of an applicant's work.
You can also consult print sources for ideas:
Skim the topics in specialized indexes in your field such as Philosopher's Index,
Geographical Abstracts, Women's Studies Abstracts, and so on (in the bibliography, see
items in category 2 in your field).
Skim a journal that reviews the year's work in your field (in the bibliography, see items
in category 2 in your field).
Academic research is meant to be shared, but the understanding it brings is also valuable to
you alone. So think ahead: look for a project that might help you a year from now. Keep in
mind, though, that you may be in for a long relationship with your topic. If so, be sure it
interests you enough to get you through the inevitable rocky stretches.
2.1.2 Make Your Topic Manageable
If you pick a topic whose name sounds like an encyclopedia entry—bridges, birds, masks—
you'll find so many sources that you could spend a lifetime reading them. You must carve out
of your topic a manageable piece. You can start before you head to the library by limiting
your topic to reflect a special interest in it: What is it about, say, masks that made you choose
them? What particular aspect of them interests or puzzles you? Think about your topic in a
context that you know something about, then add words and phrases to reflect that

knowledge:
masks in religious ceremonies
masks as symbols in Hopi religious ceremonies
mudhead masks as symbols of sky spirits in Hopi fertility ceremonies

You might not be able to focus your topic until after you start reading about it. That takes
time, so start early (you can do much of this preliminary work online):
Begin with an overview of your topic in a general encyclopedia (in the bibliography, see
items in category 2 in the general references); then read about it in a specialized one (see
items in category 2 in your field).
Skim a survey of your topic (encyclopedia entries usually cite a few).
Skim subheads under your topic in an annual bibliography in your field (in the
bibliography, see items in category 4 in your field). That will also give you a start on a
reading list.
Search the Internet for the topic (but be cautious about what you find; see 3.4.3).
Especially useful are topics that spark debate: Fisher claims that Halloween masks reveal
children's archetypal fears, but do they? Even if you can't resolve the debate, you can learn
how such debates are conducted (for more on this, see 3.1.2).
2.1.3 Question Your Topic
Do this not just once, early on, but throughout your project. Ask questions as you read,
especially how and why (see also 4.1.1–4.1.2). Try the following kinds of questions (the
categories are loose and overlap, so don't worry about keeping them distinct).
1. Ask how the topic fits into a larger context (historical, social, cultural, geographic,
functional, economic, and so on):
How does your topic fit into a larger story? What came before masks? How did masks
come into being? Why? What changes have they caused in other parts of their social or
geographic setting? How and why did that happen? Why have masks become a part of
Halloween? How and why have masks helped make Halloween the biggest American
holiday after Christmas?
How is your topic a functioning part of a larger system? How do masks reflect the
values of specific societies and cultures? What roles do masks play in Hopi dances? In
scary movies? In masquerade parties? For what purposes are masks used other than
disguise? How has the booming market for kachina masks influenced traditional
designs?
How does your topic compare to and contrast with other topics like it? How do masks

www.itpub.net

in Native American ceremonies differ from those in Africa? What do Halloween masks
have to do with Mardi Gras masks? How are masks and cosmetic surgery alike?
2. Ask questions about the nature of the thing itself, as an independent entity:
How has your topic changed through time? Why? What is its future? How have
Halloween masks changed? Why? How have Native American masks changed? Why?
How do the parts of your topic fit together as a system? What parts of a mask are
most significant in Hopi ceremonies? Why? Why do some masks cover only the eyes?
Why do so few masks cover just the bottom half of the face?
How many different categories of your topic are there? What are the different kinds of
Halloween masks? What are the different qualities of masks? What are the different
functions of Halloween masks?
3. Turn positive questions into a negative ones: Why have masks not become a part of
Christmas? How do Native American masks not differ from those in Africa? What parts of
masks are typically not significant in religious ceremonies?
4. Ask speculative questions: Why are masks common in African religions but not in
Western ones? Why are children more comfortable wearing Halloween masks than are
most adults? Why don't hunters in camouflage wear masks?
5. Ask What if? questions: How would things be different if your topic never existed,
disappeared, or were put into a new context? What if no one ever wore masks except for
safety reasons? What if everyone wore masks in public? What if movies and TV were like
Greek plays and all the actors wore masks? What if it were customary to wear masks on
blind dates? In marriage ceremonies? At funerals?
6. Ask questions that reflect disagreements with a source: If a source makes a claim you
think is weakly supported or even wrong, make that disagreement a question (see also
4.1.2). Martinez claims that carnival masks uniquely allow wearers to escape social
norms. But I think religious masks also allow wearers to escape from the material realm to
the spiritual. Is there a larger pattern of all masks creating a sense of alternative forms of
social or spiritual life?
7. Ask questions that build on agreement: If a source offers a claim you think is persuasive,
ask questions that extend its reach (see also 4.1.1). Elias shows that masked balls became
popular in eighteenth-century London in response to anxiety about social mobility. Is the
same anxiety responsible for similar developments in other European capitals? You can
also ask a question that supports the same claim with additional evidence. Elias supports
his claim about masked balls entirely with published sources. Is it also supported by
evidence from unpublished sources such as letters and diaries?
8. Ask questions analogous to those that others have asked about similar topics. Smith
analyzed the Battle of Gettysburg from an economic point of view. What would an
economic analysis of the Battle of the Alamo turn up?

9. Look for questions that other researchers pose but don't answer. Many journal articles
end with a paragraph or two about open questions, ideas for more research, and so on. You
might not be able to do all the research they suggest, but you might carve out a piece of it.
10. Find a Web discussion list on your topic, then “lurk,” just reading the exchanges to
understand the kinds of questions those on the list discuss. If you can't find a list using a
search engine, ask a teacher or visit the Web site of professional organizations in your
field. Look for questions that spark your interest. You can even ask a question of the list so
long as it is very specific and narrowly focused, but wait until you see whether questions
from students are welcomed.
2.1.4 Evaluate Your Questions
Not all answers are equally useful, so evaluate your questions and scrap those that are
unlikely to yield interesting answers. Reconsider when the following is true.
1. You can answer the question too easily.
You can look it up: What masks are used in Navajo dances?
You can summarize a source: What does Fisher say about masks and fears?
2. You can't find good evidence to support the answer.
No relevant facts exist: Are Mayan masks modeled on space aliens?
The question is based on preference or taste: Are Balinese or Mayan masks more
beautiful?
You must read too many sources: How are masks made? You don't want to plow
through countless reports to find the best evidence (this usually results from a question
that's too broad).
You can't get the sources that your readers think are crucial. In even moderately
advanced projects, you'll be expected to work with the best sources available; for a
thesis and dissertation, they're essential. If you can't obtain those sources, find another
question.
3. You can't plausibly disprove the answer.
The answer seems self-evident because the evidence overwhelmingly favors one
answer. How important are masks in Inuit culture? The answer is obvious: Very. If you
can't imagine disproving a claim, then proving it is pointless. (On the other hand, worldclass reputations have been won by those who questioned a claim that seemed selfevidently true—for instance, that the sun went around the earth—and dared to disprove
it.)

www.itpub.net

Don't reject a question because you think someone must already have asked it. Until you
know, pursue its answer as if you asked first. Even if someone has answered it, you might
come up with a better answer or at least one with a new slant. In fact, in the humanities and
social sciences the best questions usually have more than one good answer. You can also
organize your project around comparing and contrasting competing answers and supporting
the best one (see 6.2.5).
The point is to find a question that you want to answer. Too many students, both graduate
and undergraduate, think that the aim of education is to memorize settled answers to someone
else's questions. It is not. It is to learn to find your own answers to your own questions. To do
that, you must learn to wonder about things, to let them puzzle you, particularly about things
that seem most commonplace.

2.2 Propose Some Working Answers
Before you get deep into your project, try one more step. It is one that some beginners resist
but that experienced researchers usually attempt. Once you have a question, imagine some
plausible answers, no matter how sketchy or speculative. At this stage, don't worry whether
they're right. That comes later.
For example, suppose you ask, Why do some religions use masks in ceremonies while
others don't? You might speculate,
Maybe cultures with many spirits need masks to distinguish them.
Maybe masks are common in cultures that mix religion and medicine.
Maybe religions originating in the Middle East were influenced by the Jewish prohibition against idolatry.

Even a general answer can suggest something worth studying:
Maybe it has to do with the role of masks in nonreligious areas of a culture.

Try to imagine at least one plausible answer, no matter how tentative or speculative. If after
lots of research you can't confirm it, you can organize your report around why that answer
seemed reasonable at the time but turned out to be wrong, and so isn't worth the time of other
researchers. That in itself can be a valuable contribution to the conversation on your topic.
(See 10.1.1–10.1.2 for how to use an apparently good idea that turns out to be wrong.)
In fact, look for two or three plausible answers. Even if you prefer one, you can improve it
by testing it against the others, and in any event, you can't show that an answer is right if you
can't also show why others are wrong. Even early in the project, write out your answers as
clearly and as fully as you can. It is too easy to think that you have a clear idea when you
don't. Putting a foggy idea into words is the best way to clarify it, or to discover that you can't.
2.2.1 Decide on a Working Hypothesis
If one answer seems promising, call it your working hypothesis and use it to guide your

research. You can, of course, look for evidence with no more than a question to guide you,
because any question limits the number of plausible answers. But even the most tentative
working hypothesis helps you to think ahead, especially about the kind of evidence that you'll
need to support it. Will you need numbers? quotations? observations? images? historical
facts? More important, what kind of evidence would disprove your hypothesis? Answer those
questions, and you know the kind of data to watch for and to keep. In fact, until you have a
hypothesis, you can't know whether any data you collect are relevant to any question worth
asking.
If you can't imagine any working hypothesis, reconsider your question. Review your list of
exploratory questions to find one that you can answer; if you skipped that step, go back to
2.1.3. You may even decide to start over with a new topic. That costs time in the short run,
but it may save you from a failed project. If you're working on a thesis or dissertation, you can
wait longer to firm up a hypothesis while you read and ponder, but don't get deeply into your
project without at least the glimmer of a possible answer.
Under no circumstances put off thinking about a hypothesis until you begin drafting your
report or, worse, until you've almost finished it. You might not settle on the best answer to
your question until you've written your last page: writing, even revising, is itself an act of
discovery. Just don't wait until that last page to start thinking about some answer.
2.2.2 Beware the Risks in a Working Hypothesis
It is a bad idea to settle on a final answer too soon. But many new researchers and some
experienced ones are afraid to consider any working hypothesis early in their project, even
one they hold lightly, because they fear it might bias their thinking. There is some risk of that,
but a working hypothesis need not close your mind to a better one. Even the most objective
scientist devises an experiment to test for just a few predicted outcomes, often just one. In
fact, researchers who don't state a hypothesis usually have one in mind, but don't want to seem
publicly committed to it, lest it turn out wrong.
A working hypothesis is a risk only if it blinds you to a better one or if you can't give it up
when the evidence says you should. So as in all relationships, don't fall too hard for your first
hypothesis: the more you like it, the less easily you'll see its flaws. Despite that risk, it's better
to start with a flawed hypothesis than with none at all.
2.2.3 If You Can't Find an Answer, Argue for Your Question
We have focused on questions so much that you might think that your project fails if you can't
answer yours. In fact, much important research explains why a question no one has asked
should be, even though the researcher can't answer it: Do turtles dream? Why is yawning
contagious but being sleepy isn't? Or is it? Such reports focus on why the question is
important and what a good answer might look like. Or you may find that someone has
answered your question, but incompletely or even, if you're lucky, incorrectly. If you can't
find the right answer, you help readers by showing that a widely accepted one is wrong. (See
10.1.2 for how to use this plan in your introduction.)

www.itpub.net

Only when you ask question after question will you develop the critical imagination you'll
need in any profession you follow. In fact, as experienced researchers know, most issues have
few, if any, final answers, because there are no final questions. They know that it's as
important to ask a new question as it is to answer an old one, and that one day their new
question will become old and yield to a newer researcher's still newer one.
Your job is to become that newer researcher.

2.3 Build a Storyboard to Plan and Guide Your Work
For a short paper, you might not need a detailed plan—a sketch of an outline might do. But
for a long project, you'll usually need more, especially for one as long as a thesis or
dissertation. The first plan that comes to mind is usually an outline, with its I's and II's and A's
and B's and so on (see 23.4.2). If you prefer an outline, use one, especially if your project is
relatively short. The problem is that an outline can force you to specify too much too soon and
so lock up a final form before you've done your best thinking.
To avoid that risk, many researchers, including those outside the academic world, plan long
reports on a storyboard. A storyboard is like an outline spread over several pages, with lots of
space for adding data and ideas as you go. It is more flexible than an outline: it can help you
plan your search for evidence, organize your argument, write a first draft, and test a final one.
As opposed to lines in an outline, you can physically move storyboard pages around without
having to print a new plan every time you try out a new organization. You can spread its
pages across a wall, group related pages, and put minor sections below major ones to create a
“picture” of your project that shows you at a glance the design of the whole and your
progress through it.
2.3.1 State Your Question and Working Hypotheses
To start a storyboard, state at the top of its first page your question and working hypothesis as
exactly as you can. Then add plausible alternatives to help you see more clearly its limits and
strengths. Add new hypotheses as you think of them, and cross off those you prove wrong.
But save them, because you might be able to use one of them in your introduction (see
10.1.1).
2.3.2 State Your Reasons
Put at the top of separate pages each reason that might support your best hypothesis, even if
you have only one or two (for more on reasons, see 5.4.2). Imagine explaining your project to
a friend. You say, I want to show that Alamo stories helped develop a unique Texan identity,
and your friend asks, Why do you think so? Your reasons are the general statements that you
offer to support your answer: Well, first, the stories distorted facts to emphasize what became
central to Texan identity; second, the stories were first used to show that Texas (and the Wild
West) was a new kind of frontier; third, . . . and so on.

If you can think of only one or two reasons (you'll usually need more), put placeholders at
the tops of pages: Reason 3: Something about Alamo stories making Texans feel special. If
you know only how you want a reason to support your answer, state that: Reason 4:
Something to show that Alamo stories were more than just myth. Each reason, of course,
needs support, so for each reason, ask Why do I think that? What evidence will I need to prove
it? That will help you focus your search for evidence (see 2.3.3 and 5.4.2).
If you're new to your topic or early in your project, your reasons may be only educated
guesses that you'll change; if you don't, you might not be self-critical enough. But a list of
reasons, no matter how speculative, is the best framework to guide your research and focus
your thinking, and certainly better than no reasons at all.
2.3.3 Sketch in the Kind of Evidence You Should Look For
Every field prefers its own kinds of evidence—numbers, quotations, observations, historical
facts, images, and so on. So for each reason, sketch the kind of evidence that you think you'll
need to support it. Even imagine what the most convincing evidence would look like. If you
can't imagine the kind of evidence you'll need, leave that part of the page blank, then read
secondary sources to find out the kind of evidence that researchers in your field favor (see
3.1.2).
2.3.4 Look at the Whole
Lay the pages on a table or tape them on a wall. Then step back and look at their order. When
you plan a first draft, you must put its parts in some order, so you might as well think about
one now. Can you see a logic in your order? cause and effect? narrative time? relative
importance? complexity? length? (See 6.2.5 for more principles of order.) Try out different
orders. This storyboard isn't your final plan; it's only a tool to guide your thinking and
organize what you find.
When you fill a page, try drafting that section, because writing out your ideas can improve
your thinking at every stage of your project.
Someday, you may have the leisure to amble through sources, reading just what interests
you. Such random browsing has opened up important lines of research. But if your report is
due in a month or so, you can't wait for lightning to strike; you need a plan. A storyboard is a
simple and reliable device to help you create one.

2.4 Organize a Writing Support Group
A down side of scholarly research is its isolation. Except for group projects, you'll read, think,
and write mostly alone. But it doesn't have to be that way, at least not entirely. Look for
someone other than your instructor or advisor who will talk with you about your progress,
review your drafts, even pester you about how much you have written. That might be a
generous friend, but look first for another writer so that you can comment on each other's

www.itpub.net

ideas and drafts.
Better yet is a writing group of four or five people working on their own projects who meet
regularly to discuss one another's work. Early on, start each meeting with a summary of each
person's project in that three-part sentence: I'm working on the topic of X, because I want to
find out Y, so that I (and you) can better understand Z. As your projects develop, start with an
“elevator story,” a short summary of your research that you might give someone in the
elevator on the way to the meeting. It should include that three-part sentence, a working
hypothesis, and the major reasons supporting it (see 13.4).
In later stages, the group shares outlines and drafts so that they can serve as surrogate
readers to anticipate how your final readers will respond. If your group has a problem with
your draft, so will your final readers. They can even help you brainstorm when you bog down.
But for most writers, a writing group is most valuable for the discipline it imposes. It is easier
to meet a schedule when you know you must report your progress to others.
Writing groups are standard practice for theses or dissertations. But the rules may differ for
a class paper. Some teachers think that a group or writing partner might provide more help
than is appropriate, so be clear with your instructor what your group will do. If you don't, she
may decide the assistance you have received is inappropriate (see 7.10).

3 Finding Useful Sources
3.1

3.2

3.3

Understand the Kinds of Sources Readers Expect You to Use
3.1.1

Consult Primary Sources for Evidence

3.1.2

Read Secondary Sources to Learn from Other Researchers

3.1.3

Read Tertiary Sources for Introductory Overviews

Record Your Sources Fully, Accurately, and Appropriately
3.2.1

Determine Your Citation Style

3.2.2

Record Bibliographic Data

Search for Sources Systematically
3.3.1

Look for Someone Who Knows Something about Your Topic

3.4

3.5

3.3.2

Skim the Internet

3.3.3

Talk to Reference Librarians

3.3.4

Browse in Your Reference Area

3.3.5

Skim a Few Specialized Reference Works

3.3.6

Search Your Library Catalog

3.3.7

Search Guides to Periodical Literature

3.3.8

Browse the Shelves

3.3.9

For Advanced Projects, Follow Bibliographic Trails

Evaluate Sources for Relevance and Reliability
3.4.1

Evaluate the Relevance of Sources

3.4.2

Evaluate the Reliability of Print Sources

3.4.3

Evaluate the Reliability of Online Sources

Look beyond the Usual Kinds of References

Once you have at least a question and perhaps a working hypothesis along with a few
tentative reasons for supporting it, you can start looking for the data you'll need to support
your reasons and test your hypothesis. In this chapter we explain how to find those data and in
the next how to work with them. But don't think of finding sources and reading them as
separate steps. Once you have a promising source, read it to find other sources. And as you
fill your storyboard with notes, you'll discover gaps and new questions that only more sources
can fill. So while we discuss finding and using sources as two steps, you'll more often do
them repeatedly and simultaneously.

3.1 Understand the Kinds of Sources Readers Expect You to Use

www.itpub.net

Depending on your experience, readers will expect you to use different levels of sources,
called primary, secondary, and tertiary (think first-, second-, and thirdhand). These aren't
sharply defined categories, but they roughly characterize how researchers think about most
sources.
3.1.1 Consult Primary Sources for Evidence
In fields such as literary studies, the arts, and history, primary sources are original works—
diaries, letters, manuscripts, images, films, film scripts, recordings, and musical scores created
by writers, artists, composers, and so on. Those sources provide data—the words, images, and
sounds that you use as evidence to support your reasons. Data can also be objects: coins,
clothing, tools, and other artifacts from the period or belonging to a person you're studying.
In fields such as economics, psychology, chemistry, and so on, researchers typically collect
data through observation and experiment. In others, researchers gather evidence through
interviews. (To conduct effective interviews, you must use reliable methods for eliciting and
recording the information you collect.) In such fields, evidence consists of the data that
researchers collect. The primary sources for those collected data are the publications that first
publish them, ranging from government and commercial databases to scholarly journals.
Experienced researchers look for data in primary sources first. If, for example, you were
writing on Alamo stories, you'd try to find sources written at the time—letters, diaries,
eyewitness reports, and so on.
3.1.2 Read Secondary Sources to Learn from Other Researchers
Secondary sources are books and articles that analyze primary sources, usually written by and
for other researchers. A report in a scholarly journal analyzing Alamo stories would be a
secondary source for researchers working on those stories. Secondary sources also include
specialized encyclopedias and dictionaries that offer essays written by scholars in a field. You
use secondary sources for three purposes:
1. To Keep Up with Current Research. Researchers read secondary sources to keep up with
the work of other researchers, to inform and refine their thinking, and to motivate their
own work by adding to a published line of research.
2. To Find Other Points of View. A research report is not complete until the researcher
acknowledges and responds to the views of others and to his readers' predictable questions
and disagreements (see 5.4.3). You can find most of those other points of view in
secondary sources. What alternatives to your ideas do they offer? What evidence do they
cite that you must acknowledge? Some new researchers think they weaken their case if
they mention any view opposing their own. The truth is the opposite. When you
acknowledge competing views, you show readers that you not only know those views but
can confidently respond to them (for more on this, see 5.4.3).
More important, you must use those competing views to improve your own. You can't

understand what you think until you understand why a rational person might think
differently. So as you look for sources, don't look just for those that support your views. Be
alert as well for those that contradict them.
3. To Find Models for Your Own Research and Analysis. You can use secondary sources
to find out not just what others have written about your topic, but how they have written
about it, as models for the form and style of your own report. Imagine a secondary source
as a colleague talking to you about your topic. As you respond, you'd want to sound like
someone who knows the field, and so you'd try to learn how she reasons, the language she
uses, the kinds of evidence she offers, and the kinds she rarely or never uses. The
“conversation” would be in writing, so you'd even imitate stylistic details such as whether
she writes in long paragraphs or breaks up her pages with subheads and bullet points
(common in the social sciences, less common in the humanities).
You can also use a secondary source as a model for your conceptual analysis. If, for
example, you were analyzing Alamo stories, you might study how a source treats Custer's
Last Stand. Is its approach psychological, social, historical, political? Its particular reasons or
evidence will probably be irrelevant to your project, but you might support your answer with
the same kinds of data and reasoning, perhaps even following the same organization.
So if you come across a source that's not exactly on your topic but treats one like it, skim it
to see how that researcher thinks about his material and presents it. (You don't have to cite
that source if you use only its general logic, but you may cite it to give your own approach
more authority.)
Researchers use data reported in secondary sources only when they can't find them in
primary sources. Then they're cautious about using those secondary sources, because
secondhand reports of data have a high error rate. If you're doing very advanced work, check
the accuracy of important quotations, facts, or numbers from secondary sources. Those who
publish in respected places rarely misreport deliberately, but they make careless mistakes
more often than nonexperts think or experts admit.
Of course, if you were studying how the Alamo story has been analyzed, then secondary
sources offering those analyses would be your primary sources.
If you're new to a field, you may find secondary sources hard to read: they assume a lot of
background knowledge, and many aren't clearly written (see 11.2). If you're working on a
topic new to you, you might begin with an overview in a specialized encyclopedia or reliable
tertiary source.
3.1.3 Read Tertiary Sources for Introductory Overviews
Tertiary sources are based on secondary sources, usually written for non-specialists. They
include general encyclopedias and dictionaries, as well as newspapers and magazines like
Time and the Atlantic Monthly and commercial books written for a general audience. Welledited general encyclopedias offer a quick overview of many topics. Beware, however, of
online encyclopedias, such as Wikipedia, that rely on anonymous contributions rather than on
carefully edited entries written by established researchers. Wikipedia has proved to be

www.itpub.net

relatively accurate in the sciences, but overall it is uneven and sometimes wrong. Never cite it
as an authoritative source.
Be similarly cautious about using magazine and newspaper articles. Some describe research
reported in secondary sources reliably, but most oversimplify, or worse, misreport it. You
would, of course, treat such a source as primary if you were studying how it deals with a
topic, such as gender bias in the Encyclopedia Britannica or hoaxes in Wikipedia.
Once you understand kinds of sources, you can begin looking for them.

3.2 Record Your Sources Fully, Accurately, and Appropriately
Before you look for sources, you should know how to cite the ones you find. Your readers
will trust your report only if they trust your evidence, and they won't trust your evidence if
they can't find your sources. Your first obligation as a researcher is to cite your sources
accurately and fully so that your readers can find them.
3.2.1 Determine Your Citation Style
Most fields require a specific citation style. The two most common ones are described in
detail in part 2:
notes-bibliography style (or simply bibliography style), used widely in the humanities and
in some social sciences (see chapters 16 and 17)
parenthetical citations–reference list style (or simply reference list style), used in most
social sciences and in the natural sciences (see chapters 18 and 19)
If you are uncertain which style to use, consult your instructor. Before you start compiling
your list of sources, read the general introduction to citations in chapter 15, then depending on
the citation style you are required to use, read the introduction to bibliography style (chapter
16) or reference list style (chapter 18).
3.2.2 Record Bibliographic Data
To save time and avoid errors, record all the citation information you will need when you first
find a source. Most of this information appears on the title page of a book or at the head of a
journal article. The specific information you need depends on the type of source, but for each
source, record at least the following:
Who wrote or assembled the source?
author(s)
editor(s)

translator(s)
What data identify the source?
title and subtitle
title and subtitle of any larger work that contains the source (such as a collection,
journal, or newspaper)
page numbers if the source appears in a larger work
volume number
issue number
edition number
URL and date you accessed the material, for online sources
Who published the source and when?
publisher's name
place of publication
date of publication
For your own use, you might record Library of Congress call numbers. You don't include
them in bibliographic citations, but you may find them helpful if you must consult the source
again.
At some point, you'll need to format this bibliographic information into your required
citation style, so you should record your sources in that style now. You can find templates and
examples for bibliography style in figure 16.1 and chapter 17; for reference list style, refer to
figure 18.1 and chapter 19.
As you record these data, you'll be tempted to take shortcuts, because it's boring work, and
rules about periods, commas, and parentheses can feel like nit-picking. But nothing labels you
a beginner faster than citations that are inappropriate, or worse, incomplete or inaccurate. So
get in the habit of recording bibliographic data for a source fully, accurately, and
appropriately the moment you handle it. There are computer programs that automatically
format citations for you. They are useful aids, but they cannot substitute for your own
knowledge of proper citation forms and methods, and not all of the software works perfectly.

3.3 Search for Sources Systematically
As you search for sources, you must be knowledgeably systematic, because if you miss an

www.itpub.net

important one, you'll lose credibility.
3.3.1 Look for Someone Who Knows Something about Your Topic
You might start by asking around to find someone who knows something about your topic
and standard reference works on it: advanced students, faculty, even people outside the
academic community. You might look up your topic in the yellow pages of the phonebook.
You won't always find someone, but you might get lucky.
3.3.2 Skim the Internet
Before college, many students do research only on the Web, because their high school
libraries are small and they need to find only a few sources. In college, you can still do some
preliminary work with a scholarly search engine such as Google Scholar. It will give you a
rough idea of the kinds of sources available. If your library catalog is online, you can also
start there (see 3.3.6 below). But if you search just the Internet, you'll miss important sources
that you'll find only by poking around in your library. Once again, you'll work most
efficiently if you have a plan.
3.3.3 Talk to Reference Librarians
If you don't know how to find what you need, ask a librarian. Most college libraries offer
tours of reference rooms and special collections, and short seminars on how to search the
catalog, databases, and other sources of information. If you're a new researcher, seize every
opportunity to learn online search techniques in your field.
You can also talk to librarians who specialize in your area. They won't find sources for you,
but they will help you look for them. If you have a research question, share it: I'm looking for
data on X because I want to find out. . . . If you have a working hypothesis and reasons, share
them too: I'm looking for data to show Y [your reason] because I want to claim Z [your
hypothesis]. Rehearse your questions to avoid wasting your time and theirs.
3.3.4 Browse in Your Reference Area
Researchers in all fields share common values and habits of thought, but every field has its
own ways of doing things. To learn about the ways of your field, browse the shelves in your
library's reference room that hold guides to your field's particular research methods,
databases, and special resources (in the bibliography, see items in category 3 in your field). At
least familiarize yourself with the following resources (in the bibliography, see category 4 for
lists of sources in your field; many are also online):
a bibliography of works published each year in your field, such as Philosopher's Index or
Education Index
summary bibliographies of works on a specific topic collected over several years

(Bibliographic Index is a bibliography of bibliographies)
collections of abstracts that summarize articles in newspapers and in professional
journals
reviews of the year's work; look for a title in your field beginning with Reviews in . ..
for new fields, Web sites maintained by individuals or scholarly associations
If you know even a little of the secondary literature on your topic, you can begin looking for
more substantive sources (skip to 3.3.7–3.3.8). If you don't, you might start with some
specialized reference works.
3.3.5 Skim a Few Specialized Reference Works
Start by looking up your topic in a relevant specialized encyclopedia or dictionary such as the
Encyclopedia of Philosophy or the Concise Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms, where you
may find an overview of your topic and often a list of standard primary and secondary sources
(in the bibliography, see items in categories 1 and 2 in your field).
3.3.6 Search Your Library Catalog
SUBJECT HEADINGS IN BOOKS. As soon as you find one recent book relevant to your topic,

look it up in your library's online catalog to find its Library of Congress subject headings;
they will be at the bottom of the entry. For example, the online entry for this book includes
these two topics:
1. Dissertations, Academic. 2. Academic writing.

You can click on the subject headings to find other books on the same topics. Many of those
sources will have still more subject headings that can lead you to still more sources; it can
turn into an endless trail.
KEYWORDS. Also search your online catalog using keywords from your question or working

hypothesis—Alamo, Texas independence, James Bowie. If you find too many titles, start with
those published in the last ten years by well-known university presses. For a wider selection,
search WorldCat if your library subscribes. Otherwise, search the Library of Congress catalog
at http://www.loc.gov. It has links to large university catalogs. Start early if you expect to get
books on interlibrary loan.
ARTICLES. If most sources on your topic are articles, locate a recent one in your library's

online databases. Its database entry will include a list of keywords. Search for them to find
more articles on your topic. In most cases, you can just click on them. Some databases also
provide abstracts of journal articles. Use these keywords to search the library catalog, as well.
3.3.7 Search Guides to Periodical Literature

www.itpub.net

If you've done research before, you're probably familiar with annual guides such as Readers'
Guide to Periodical Literature, which cites sources such as magazines and newspapers. Most
specialized fields also have yearly guides to secondary sources, such as Art Abstracts,
Historical Abstracts, and Abstracts in Anthropology (in the bibliography, see items in
category 4 in your field). Most are available online or on CDs.
All those resources will direct you to more sources, but none of them can substitute for the
kind of in-library search that turns up an unexpectedly useful source.
3.3.8 Browse the Shelves
You might think that online research is faster than walking around your library. But it can be
slower, and if you work only online, you may miss crucial sources that you'll find only in the
library. More important, you'll miss the benefits of serendipity—a chance encounter with a
source that you find only in person.
If you're allowed in the stacks (where all the books that you can check out are kept), find
the shelf with books on your topic. Then scan the titles on that shelf and the ones above,
below, and on either side. Then turn around and skim titles behind you; you never know.
When you spot a promising title, especially on a university press book with a new binding,
skim its table of contents, then its index for keywords related to your question or its answer.
Then skim its bibliography for titles that look relevant to your project. You can do all that
faster with books on a shelf than you can online.
If the book looks promising, skim its preface or introduction. If it still looks promising, set
it aside for a closer look. Even if it doesn't seem relevant, record its Library of Congress call
number and bibliographic data (author, title, publisher, date of publication and so on; see part
2 of this manual for the details), and in a few words summarize what the book seems to be
about. A month later, you might realize that it's more useful than you thought.
You can check tables of contents for many journals online, but browsing in the journals
area of a library can be more productive. Find the journals that have promising articles. Skim
tables of contents for the prior ten years. Most volumes include a yearly summary table of
contents. Then take a quick look at the journals shelved nearby. Skim their most recent tables
of contents. You will be surprised at how often you find a relevant article that you would have
missed had you done your work entirely online.
If you are new to a field, you can get a rough impression of the academic quality of a
journal by its look. If it's on glossy paper with lots of illustrations, even advertisements, it
might be more journalistic than scholarly. Those are not infallible signs of unreliable
scholarship, but they are worth considering.
3.3.9 For Advanced Projects, Follow Bibliographic Trails
If you're into advanced work, use the bibliographies in your sources to find new sources and
use their bibliographies in turn to find more. Do this:

Skim bibliographies of recent books on your topic; look at any work mentioned in all or
most of them, along with other publications by its author.
If you find a source useful, skim its index for authors mentioned on four or more pages.
Look for reviews of research in the first few paragraphs of journal articles.
Look for recent PhD dissertations even marginally on your topic. Almost every
dissertation reviews research in its first or second chapter.
New sources are best, but you may discover an old one with data long neglected.

3.4 Evaluate Sources for Relevance and Reliability
You will probably find more sources than you can use, so you must evaluate their usefulness
by skimming quickly for two criteria: relevance and reliability.
3.4.1 Evaluate the Relevance of Sources
Once you decide a book might be relevant, skim it systematically:
If its index lists keywords related to your question or its answers, skim the pages on
which those words occur.
Skim its introduction, especially its last page, where writers often outline their text.
Skim its last chapter, especially the first and last six or seven pages.
If you have time, do the same for chapters that look relevant, especially those for which
the index lists many of your keywords.
If the source is a collection of articles, skim the editor's introduction.
(Be sure that you're looking at a book's most recent edition. Over time, researchers change
their views, refining them, even rejecting earlier ones.) If you're doing advanced work, read
book reviews of promising sources (see section 4 of the bibliography of resources in your
field).
If your source is a journal article, do this:
Read its abstract, if any.
Skim the last two or three paragraphs of the introduction (or other opening section) and
all of any section called “Conclusion.”
If the article has no separate introduction or conclusion, skim its first and last few

www.itpub.net

paragraphs.
Skim the first paragraph or two after each subhead, if any.
If your source is online, do this:
If it looks like a printed article, follow the steps for a journal article.
Skim any section labeled “Introduction,” “Overview,” “Summary,” or the like. If there is
none, look for a link labeled “About the Site” or something similar.
If the site has a link labeled “Site Map” or “Index,” follow it and check the list, looking
for keywords related to your question or its answers. Click to skim those pages.
If the site has a “search” resource, type in keywords from your topic.
3.4.2 Evaluate the Reliability of Print Sources
You can't judge a source until you read it, but there are signs of its reliability:
1. Is the author a reputable scholar? Most publications cite an author's academic
credentials; you can find more with a search engine. Most established scholars are reliable,
but be cautious if the topic is a contested social issue such as gun control or abortion. Even
reputable scholars can have axes to grind, especially if their research is supported by a
special interest group.
2. Is the source current? Many reputable scholars write books and articles popularizing the
research of others. But by the time you read them, these tertiary sources may be out of
date. How fast a source dates varies by subject, so check with someone who knows your
field. For journal articles in the social sciences, more than ten years is pushing the limit.
For books, figure fifteen or so. Publications in the humanities have a longer life span.
3. Is the source published by a reputable press? You can trust most university presses,
especially those at well-known schools. Before they publish a manuscript, they ask experts
to review it (a process called peer review). You can also trust some commercial presses in
some fields, such as Norton in literature, Ablex in sciences, or West in the law. Be
skeptical of a commercial book that makes sensational claims, even if its author has a PhD
after his name.
4. Was the article peer-reviewed? Most scholarly journals, both print and online, publish
only peer-reviewed articles. Few commercial magazines use peer review, and fewer still
check an author's facts. If a report hasn't been peer-reviewed, use it cautiously.
5. Has the source received good reviews? If the source is a book published more than a
year ago, it may have been reviewed in a journal in the field. Many fields have indexes to
published reviews that tell you how others evaluate a source. (See the bibliography.)
6. Has the source been frequently cited by others? You can roughly estimate how

influential a source is by how often others cite it. To determine that, consult a citation
index (in the bibliography, see section 4 in your field).
Those signs don't guarantee that a source is reliable, but they should give you reasonable
confidence in it. If you can't find reliable sources, acknowledge the limits of the ones you
have. Of course, you may find an exciting research problem when you discover that a source
thought to be reliable is not.
3.4.3 Evaluate the Reliability of Online Sources
Evaluate online sources as you do those in print, but more cautiously. The number of reliable
Web sources grows every day, but they are still islands in a swamp of misinformation. If you
find data available only on the Web, look for sites or online publications with these signs of
reliability:
1. The site is sponsored by a reputable organization. Some sites supported by individuals
are reliable; most are not.
2. It is related to a reliable professional journal.
3. It supplements reliable print sources. Some journals use the Web to host discussions
among authors and readers, to offer data too new to be in libraries, to archive data not in
articles, or to present illustrations too expensive to print. Many government and academic
databases are only online.
4. It avoids heated advocacy for or against a contested social issue.
5. It does not make wild claims, attack other researchers, use abusive language, or make
errors of spelling, punctuation, and grammar.
6. It indicates when the site was last updated. If it has no date, be cautious.
Trust a site only if careful readers would trust those who maintain it. If you don't know who
maintains it, be skeptical.
Online services now provide reliable editions of many older texts. You'll also find welledited texts at many university sites. It's “one-stop shopping”; you never have to move from
your chair. Online services are, however, far less complete than most university libraries, and
using them will teach you nothing about doing research in a real library. Some day,
everything ever printed will be available online (a future that gives some researchers mixed
feelings). But until then, surfing the Web doesn't replace prowling the stacks.

3.5 Look beyond the Usual Kinds of References
If you are writing a class paper, you'll usually have to focus narrowly on the kinds of sources
typically used in your field. But if you are doing an advanced project such as an MA thesis or
PhD dissertation, find an opportunity to search beyond them. If, for example, you were doing

www.itpub.net

a project on the economic effects of agricultural changes on London grain markets in 1600,
you might read some Elizabethan plays, look at pictures of working-class life, or look for
commentary by religious figures on social behavior. Conversely, if you were working on
visual representations of daily life in London, you might work up the economic history of the
period and place. You can't do this in the limited time you have for short papers, but when
you have months to work on a major project, try to look beyond the standard kinds of
references relevant to your question. When you do, you enrich not only your specific analysis
but your range of intellectual reference and your ability to synthesize diverse kinds of data, a
crucial competence of an inquiring mind.

4 Engaging Sources
4.1

4.2

4.3

4.4

Read Generously to Understand, Then Critically to Engage and Evaluate
4.1.1

Look for Creative Agreement

4.1.2

Look for Creative Disagreement

Take Notes Systematically
4.2.1

Create Templates for Notes

4.2.2

Know When to Summarize, Paraphrase, or Quote

4.2.3

Guard against Inadvertent Plagiarism

Take Useful Notes
4.3.1

Use Note-Taking to Advance Your Thinking

4.3.2

Take Notes Relevant to Your Question and Working Hypothesis

4.3.3

Record Relevant Context

4.3.4

Categorize Your Notes for Sorting

Write as You Read

4.5

4.6

Review Your Progress
4.5.1

Search Your Notes for an Answer

4.5.2

Invent the Question

4.5.3

Re-sort Your Notes

Manage Moments of Normal Panic

Once you find a source worth a close look, don't read it mechanically, just mining it for data
to record. Note-taking is not clerical work. When you take notes on a source thoughtfully, you
engage not just its words and ideas, but its implications, consequences, shortcomings, and
new possibilities. Engage your source as if its writer were sitting with you, eager for a
conversation (it's how you should imagine your readers engaging you).

4.1 Read Generously to Understand, Then Critically to Engage and Evaluate
For an advanced project, take the time to read your most promising sources twice, first
quickly and generously to understand them on their own terms. If you disagree too soon, you
can misunderstand or exaggerate a weakness.
Then reread them slowly and critically, as if you were amiably but pointedly questioning a
friend; imagine his or her answers, then question them. If you disagree, don't just reject a
source: read it in ways that will encourage your own original thinking.
You probably won't be able to engage your sources fully until after you've done some
reading and developed a few ideas of your own. But from the outset, be alert for ways to read
your sources not passively, as a consumer, but actively and creatively, as an engaged partner.
At some point, better earlier than later, you must look for ways to go beyond your sources,
even when you agree with them.
4.1.1 Look for Creative Agreement
It is a happy moment when a source confirms your views. But if you just passively agree, you
won't develop any of your own ideas. So try to extend what your source claims: What new
cases might it cover? What new insights can it provide? Is there confirming evidence your
source hasn't considered? Here are some ways to agree creatively.
OFFER ADDITIONAL SUPPORT. You have new evidence to support a source's claim.
Smith uses anecdotal evidence to show that the Alamo story had mythic status beyond Texas, but a study of bigcity newspapers offers better evidence.

www.itpub.net

1. Source supports a claim with old evidence, but maybe you can offer new evidence.
2. Source supports a claim with weak evidence, but maybe you can offer stronger
evidence.
CONFIRM UNSUPPORTED CLAIMS. You can prove something that a source has only assumed

or speculated.

Smith recommends visualization to improve sports performance, but a study of the mental activities of athletes
shows why that is good advice.

1. Source only speculates that X might be true, but maybe you can offer evidence to show
that it definitely is.
2. Source assumes that X is true, but maybe you can prove it.
APPLY A CLAIM MORE WIDELY. You can extend a position to new areas.
Smith has shown that medical students learn physiological processes better when they are explained with many
metaphors rather than by just one. The same appears to be true for engineers learning physical processes.

1. Source correctly applies his claim to one situation, but maybe it can apply to new ones.
2. Source claims that X is true in a specific situation, but maybe it's true in general.
4.1.2 Look for Creative Disagreement
It is even more important to note when you disagree with a source, because that might suggest
a working hypothesis for your whole report. So instead of just noting that you disagree with
its views, use that disagreement to encourage your own productive thinking. Here are some
kinds of disagreement (these aren't sharply defined categories; many overlap).
CONTRADICTIONS OF KIND. A source says something is one kind of thing, but maybe it's

another kind.

Smith says that certain religious groups are considered “cults” because of their strange beliefs, but those beliefs
are no different in kind from standard religions.

1. Source claims that X is a kind of Y (or like it), but maybe it's not.
2. Source claims that X always has Y as one its features or qualities, but maybe it doesn't.
3. Source claims that X is normal/good/significant/useful/moral/interesting/. . ., but maybe
it's not.
(You can reverse those claims and the ones that follow to state the opposite: though a source
says X is not a kind of Y, you can show that it is.)

PART-WHOLE CONTRADICTIONS. You can show that a source mistakes how the parts of

something are related.

Smith has argued that sports are crucial to an educated person, but in fact athletics has no place in college.

1. Source claims that X is a part of Y, but maybe it's not.
2. Source claims that part of X relates to another of its parts in a certain way, but maybe it
doesn't.
3. Source claims that every X has Y as one of its parts, but maybe it doesn't.
DEVELOPMENTAL OR HISTORICAL CONTRADICTIONS.

mistakes the origin and development of a topic.

You can show that a source

Smith argues that the world population will continue to rise, but it will not.

1. Source claims that X is changing, but maybe it's not.
2. Source claims that X originated in Y, but maybe it didn't.
3. Source claims that X develops in a certain way, but maybe it doesn't.
EXTERNAL CAUSE-EFFECT CONTRADICTIONS. You can show that a source mistakes a

causal relationship:

Smith claims that juveniles can be stopped from becoming criminals by “boot camps.” But evidence shows that
it makes them more likely to become criminals.

1. Source claims that X causes Y, but maybe it doesn't.
2. Source claims that X causes Y, but maybe they are both caused by Z.
3. Source claims that X is sufficient to cause Y, but maybe it's not.
4. Source claims that X causes only Y, but maybe it also causes Z.
Most contradictions don't change a conceptual
framework, but when you can contradict a standard view of things, you urge others to think in
a new way.
CONTRADICTIONS OF PERSPECTIVE.

Smith assumes that advertising is a purely economic function, but it also serves as a laboratory for new art forms.

1. Source discusses X in the context of or from the point of view of Y, but maybe a new
context or point of view reveals a new truth (the new or old context can be social, political,
philosophical, historical, economic, ethical, gender specific, etc.).
2. Source analyzes X using theory/value system Y, but maybe you can analyze X from a
new point of view and see it in a new way.

www.itpub.net

As we said, you probably won't be able to engage sources in these ways until after you've
read enough to form some views of your own. But if you keep these ways of thinking in mind
as you begin to read, you'll engage your sources sooner and more productively.
Of course, once you discover that you can productively agree or disagree with a source, you
should then ask So what? So what if you can show that while Smith claims that Easterners did
not embrace the story of the Alamo enthusiastically, in fact many did?

4.2 Take Notes Systematically
Like the other steps in a research project, note-taking goes better with a plan.

4.2.1 Create Templates for Notes
You will take notes more reliably if you set up a system that encourages you to think beyond
the mere content of your sources by analyzing and organizing that content into useful
categories. A few instructors still recommend taking notes in longhand on 3 × 5 cards, as in
figure 4.1. A card like that may seem old-fashioned, but it provides a template for efficient
note-taking, even if you take notes on a laptop. (Start a new page for each general idea or
claim that you record from a source.) Here is a plan for such a template:
At the top of each new page, create a space for bibliographic data (author, short title,
page number).
Create another space at the top for keywords (see upper right above). Those words will
later will let you sort and re-sort your notes by subject matter (for more on keywords, see
4.3.4).
Create different places on each new page for different kinds of notes. You might even

label the places (see fig. 4.1, with places for a Claim, Data, and My Qs).
In particular, create a section specifically dedicated to your own responses, agreements,
disagreements, speculations, and so on. That will encourage you to do more than simply
record the content of what you read.
When you quote the words of a source, record them in a distinctive color or font size and
style so that you can recognize quotations at a glance, and enclose them in large quotation
marks in case the file loses its formatting.
When you paraphrase a passage (see 4.2.2), record the paraphrase in a distinctive color or
font so that you can't possibly mistake it for your own ideas, and enclose it in curly
brackets (in case the file loses its formatting).
If you can't take notes directly on a computer, make paper copies of the template.
4.2.2 Know When to Summarize, Paraphrase, or Quote
It would take you forever to transcribe the exact words of every source you might want to use,
so you must know when not to quote, but to summarize or paraphrase.
Summarize when you need only the general point of a passage, section, or even whole
article or book. Summary is useful for general context or related but not specifically relevant
data or views. A summary of a source never serves as good evidence (see 5.4.2 for more on
evidence).
Paraphrase when you can represent what a source says more clearly or pointedly than it
does. Paraphrase doesn't mean just changing a word or two. You must use your own words
and your own phrasing to replace most of the words and phrasing of the passage (see 7.9.2). A
paraphrase is never as good evidence as a direct quotation.
Record exact quotations when they serve these purposes:
The quoted words constitute evidence that backs up your reasons. If, for example, you
wanted to claim that different regions responded to the Battle of the Alamo differently, you
would quote exact words from different newspapers. You would paraphrase them if you
needed only their general sentiments.
The words are from an authority who backs up your view.
They are strikingly original.
They express your ideas so compellingly that the quotation can frame the rest of your
discussion.
They state a view that you disagree with, and to be fair you want to state that view
exactly.

www.itpub.net

If you don't record important words now, you can't quote them later. So copy or photocopy
passages more often than you think you'll need (for more on photocopying, see 4.3.1). Never
abbreviate a quotation thinking you can accurately reconstruct it later. You can't. If you
misquote, you fatally undermine your credibility, so double check your quote against the
original. Then check it again.
4.2.3 Guard against Inadvertent Plagiarism
Sloppy note-taking has caused grief for students and professionals alike, ranging from ridicule
for trivial errors to professional exile for inadvertent plagiarism. To avoid that risk, commit to
heart these two iron rules for recording information in notes:
Always unambiguously identify words and ideas from a source so that weeks or months
later you cannot possibly mistake them for your own. As recommended above, record
quotations and paraphrases with quotation marks, as well as in a font that unambiguously
distinguishes them from your own ideas.
Never paraphrase a source so closely that a reader can match the phrasing and sense of
your words with those in your source (see 7.9.2).
In fact, rather than retyping quotations of more than a few lines, download or photocopy
them. Add to the top of the downloaded or photocopied page the name of the source and
keywords for sorting.
This is important: never assume that you can use what you find online without citing its
source, even if it's free and publicly available. Nothing releases you from the duty to
acknowledge your use of anything you did not personally create yourself. (For more on
plagiarism, see 7.9.)

4.3 Take Useful Notes
Readers will judge your report not just by the quality of your sources and how accurately you
report them, but also by how deeply you engage them. To do that, you must take notes in a
way that not only reflects but encourages a growing understanding of your project.
4.3.1 Use Note-Taking to Advance Your Thinking
Many inexperienced researchers think that note-taking is a matter of merely recording data.
Once they find a source, they download or photocopy pages or write down exactly what's on
them. Recording and photocopying can help you quote or paraphrase accurately, but if that's
all you do, if you don't engage your sources actively, you will simply accumulate a lot of inert
data that are likely to be equally inert in your report.
If you photocopy lots of text, annotate it in a way that engages your critical thinking. Start
by picking out those sentences that express crucial elements in a chapter or article (its claim,

major reasons, and so on). Highlight or label them in the margin. Then mark ideas or data
that you expect to include in your report. (If you use a highlighter, use different colors to
indicate these different elements.)
Then on the back of the photocopied pages, summarize what you've highlighted or sketch a
response to it, or make notes in the margin that help you interpret the highlighting. The more
you write about a source now, the better you will understand and remember it later.
4.3.2 Take Notes Relevant to Your Question and Working Hypothesis
To make your notes most useful, record not just the facts that you think you can use as
evidence, but data that help you explain those facts and their relationship to your claim. You
can create a notes template to help you remember to look for several different kinds of
information (see 4.2.1).
The first three items are directly relevant to your working hypothesis:
reasons that support your hypothesis or suggest a new one
evidence that supports your reasons
views that undermine or even contradict your hypothesis
Do not limit your notes to supporting data. You will need to respond to data that qualify or
even contradict your hypothesis when you make your case in support of it (see 5.4.3).
These next items might not support or challenge your hypothesis, but they may help you
explain its context or simply make your report more readable:
historical background of your question, what authorities have said about it, particularly
earlier research (see 6.2.2 and 10.1.1)
historical or contemporary context that explains the importance of your question
important definitions and principles of analysis
analogies, comparisons, and anecdotes that might not directly support your hypothesis
but do explain or illustrate complicated issues or simply make your analysis more
interesting
strikingly original language relevant to your topic
4.3.3 Record Relevant Context
Those who misreport sources deliberately are dishonest, but an honest researcher can mislead
inadvertently if she merely records words and ignores their role or qualifications. To guard
against misleading your reader, follow these guidelines:

www.itpub.net

